AUTHOR John Dryden

TITLE 

RHYME a a *

  In days of old, there lived, of mighty fame,
  A valiant prince, and Theseus was his name:
  A chief, who more in feats of arms excell'd,
  The rising nor the setting sun beheld.
  Of Athens he was lord; much land he won,
  And added foreign countries to his crown.
  In Scythia with the warrior queen he strove,
  Whom first by force he conquer'd, then by love;
  He brought in triumph back the beauteous dame,
  With whom her sister, fair Emilia, came.                  

RHYME a a a

  With honour to his home let Theseus ride,
  With love to friend, and fortune for his guide,
  And his victorious army at his side.

RHYME a a *

  I pass their warlike pomp, their proud array,
  Their shouts, their songs, their welcome on the way.

RHYME a a a
 
 But, were it not too long, I would recite
  The feats of Amazons, the fatal fight
  Betwixt the hardy queen and hero knight;

RHYME a a *

  The town besieged, and how much blood it cost
  The female army, and the Athenian host;                   
  The spousals of Hippolita the queen;
  What tilts and tourneys at the feast were seen;
  The storm at their return, the ladies' fear:
  But these, and other things, I must forbear.
  The field is spacious I design to sow,
  With oxen far unfit to draw the plough:
  The remnant of my tale is of a length
  To tire your patience, and to waste my strength;
  And trivial accidents shall be forborne,
  That others may have time to take their turn;             

RHYME a a a

  As was at first enjoin'd us by mine host:
  That he whose tale is best, and pleases most,
  Should win his supper at our common cost.

RHYME a a a

    And therefore where I left, I will pursue
  This ancient story, whether false or true,
  In hope it may be mended with a new.

RHYME a a *

  The prince I mention'd, full of high renown,
  In this array drew near the Athenian town;
  When in his pomp and utmost of his pride,
  Marching he chanced to cast his eye aside,                
  And saw a choir of mourning dames, who lay
  By two and two across the common way:
  At his approach they raised a rueful cry,
  And beat their breasts, and held their hands on high,
  Creeping and crying, till they seized at last
  His courser's bridle, and his feet embraced.
  Tell me, said Theseus, what and whence you are,
  And why this funeral pageant you prepare?
  Is this the welcome of my worthy deeds,
  To meet my triumph in ill-omen'd weeds?                   
  Or envy you my praise, and would destroy
  With grief my pleasures, and pollute my joy?
  Or are you injured, and demand relief?
  Name your request, and I will ease your grief.

RHYME a a *

    The most in years of all the mourning train
  Began; but swooned first away for pain,
  Then scarce recover'd spoke: Nor envy we
  Thy great renown, nor grudge thy victory;
  'Tis thine, O king, the afflicted to redress,
  And fame has fill'd the world with thy success:           
  We wretched women sue for that alone,
  Which of thy goodness is refused to none;
  Let fall some drops of pity on our grief,
  If what we beg be just, and we deserve relief:
  For none of us, who now thy grace implore,
  But held the rank of sovereign queen before;
  Till, thanks to giddy chance, which never bears,
  That mortal bliss should last for length of years,
  She cast us headlong from our high estate,
  And here in hope of thy return we wait:                   
  And long have waited in the temple nigh,
  Built to the gracious goddess Clemency.
  But reverence thou the Power whose name it bears,
  Relieve the oppress'd, and wipe the widow's tears.
  
RHYME a a *

I, wretched I, have other fortune seen,
  The wife of Capaneus, and once a queen:
  At Thebes he fell; cursed be the fatal day!
  And all the rest thou seest in this array,
  To make their moan, their lords in battle lost
  Before that town besieged by our confederate host:        
  But Creon, old and impious, who commands
  The Theban city, and usurps the lands,
  Denies the rites of funeral fires to those
  Whose breathless bodies yet he calls his foes.
  Unburn'd, unburied, on a heap they lie;
  Such is their fate, and such his tyranny;
  No friend has leave to bear away the dead,
  But with their lifeless limbs his hounds are fed.
  At this she shriek'd aloud; the mournful train
  Echoed her grief, and grovelling on the plain,            
  With groans, and hands upheld, to move his mind,
  Besought his pity to their helpless kind!

RHYME a a *

    The prince was touch'd, his tears began to flow,
  And, as his tender heart would break in two,
  He sigh'd, and could not but their fate deplore,
  So wretched now, so fortunate before.
  Then lightly from his lofty steed he flew,
  And, raising one by one the suppliant crew,
  To comfort each full solemnly he swore,
  That by the faith which knights to knighthood bore, 
  And whate'er else to chivalry belongs,
  He would not cease, till he revenged their wrongs:
  That Greece should see perform'd what he declared;
  And cruel Creon find his just reward.

RHYME a a *

  He said no more, but, shunning all delay,
  Rode on; nor enter'd Athens on his way:
  But left his sister and his queen behind,
  And waved his royal banner in the wind:
  Where in an argent field the god of war
  Was drawn triumphant on his iron car;               

RHYME a a *

  Red was his sword, and shield, and whole attire,
  And all the godhead seem'd to glow with fire;
  Even the ground glitter'd where the standard flew,
  And the green grass was dyed to sanguine hue.
  High on his pointed lance his pennon bore
  His Cretan fight, the conquer'd Minotaur:
  The soldiers shout around with generous rage,
  And in that victory their own presage.
  He praised their ardour: inly pleased to see
  His host the flower of Grecian chivalry,            

RHYME a a *

  All day he march'd, and all the ensuing night,
  And saw the city with returning light.
  The process of the war I need not tell,
  How Theseus conquer'd, and how Creon fell:
  Or after, how by storm the walls were won,
  Or how the victor sack'd and burn'd the town:
  How to the ladies he restored again
  The bodies of their lords in battle slain:

RHYME a a *

  And with what ancient rites they were interr'd;
  All these to fitter times shall be deferr'd.        
  I spare the widows' tears, their woeful cries,
  And howling at their husbands' obsequies;
  How Theseus at these funerals did assist,
  And with what gifts the mourning dames dismiss'd.

RHYME a a *

    Thus when the victor chief had Creon slain,
  And conquer'd Thebes, he pitch'd upon the plain
  His mighty camp, and, when the day return'd,
  The country wasted, and the hamlets burn'd,
  And left the pillagers, to rapine bred,
  Without control to strip and spoil the dead.        

RHYME a a *

    There, in a heap of slain, among the rest
  Two youthful knights they found beneath a load oppress'd
  Of slaughter'd foes, whom first to death they sent--
  The trophies of their strength, a bloody monument.
  Both fair, and both of royal blood they seem'd,
  Whom kinsmen to the crown the heralds deem'd;
  That day in equal arms they fought for fame;
  Their swords, their shields, their surcoats were the same.
  Close by each other laid, they press'd the ground,
  Their manly bosoms pierced with many a grisly wound;
  Nor well alive, nor wholly dead they were,
  But some faint signs of feeble life appear:

RHYME a a *

  The wandering breath was on the wing to part,
  Weak was the pulse, and hardly heaved the heart.
  These two were sisters' sons; and Arcite one
  Much famed in fields, with valiant Palamon.
  From these their costly arms the spoilers rent,
  And softly both convey'd to Theseus' tent:
  Whom, known of Creon's line, and cured with care,
  He to his city sent as prisoners of the war,        
  Hopeless of ransom, and condemn'd to lie
  In durance, doom'd a lingering death to die.

RHYME a a a

  This done, he march'd away with warlike sound,
  And to his Athens turn'd, with laurels crown'd,
  Where happy long he lived, much loved, and more renown'd.

RHYME a a *

  But in a tower, and never to be loosed,
  The woful captive kinsmen are enclosed.
    Thus year by year they pass, and day by day,
  Till once, 'twas on the morn of cheerful May,
  The young Emilia, fairer to be seen                 
  Than the fair lily on the flowery green,
  More fresh than May herself in blossoms new,
  For with the rosy colour strove her hue,
  Waked, as her custom was, before the day,
  To do the observance due to sprightly May:
  For sprightly May commands our youth to keep
  The vigils of her night, and breaks their sluggard sleep;
  Each gentle breast with kindly warmth she moves;
  Inspires new flames, revives extinguish'd loves.
  In this remembrance, Emily, ere day,                
  Arose, and dress'd herself in rich array;
  Fresh as the month, and as the morning fair:
  Adown her shoulders fell her length of hair:
  A riband did the braided tresses bind,
  The rest was loose and wanton'd in the wind.
  Aurora had but newly chased the night,
  And purpled o'er the sky with blushing light,

RHYME a a a

  When to the garden walk she took her way,
  To sport and trip along in cool of day,
  And offer maiden vows in honour of the May.         

RHYME a a *

    At every turn, she made a little stand,
  And thrust among the thorns her lily hand
  To draw the rose, and every rose she drew
  She shook the stalk, and brush'd away the dew:
  Then party-colour'd flowers of white and red
  She wove, to make a garland for her head:
  This done, she sung and caroll'd out so clear,
  That men and angels might rejoice to hear:
  Even wondering Philomel forgot to sing;
  And learn'd from her to welcome in the spring.      
  The tower, of which before was mention made,
  Within whose keep the captive knights were laid,
  Built of a large extent, and strong withal,
  Was one partition of the palace wall;
  The garden was enclosed within the square
  Where young Emilia took the morning air.

RHYME a a *

    It happen'd Palamon, the prisoner knight,
  Restless for woe, arose before the light,
  And with his jailer's leave desired to breathe
  An air more wholesome than the damps beneath.       
  This granted, to the tower he took his way,
  Cheer'd with the promise of a glorious day:

RHYME a a a

  Then cast a languishing regard around,
  And saw, with hateful eyes, the temples crown'd
  With golden spires, and all the hostile ground.

RHYME a a *

  He sigh'd, and turn'd his eyes, because he knew
  'Twas but a larger jail he had in view:
  Then look'd below, and from the castle's height
  Beheld a nearer and more pleasing sight:

RHYME a a a

  The garden, which before he had not seen,           
  In spring's new livery clad of white and green,
  Fresh flowers in wide parterres, and shady walks between.

RHYME a a *

  This view'd, but not enjoy'd, with arms across
  He stood, reflecting on his country's loss;
  Himself an object of the public scorn,
  And often wish'd he never had been born.
  At last, for so his destiny required,
  With walking giddy, and with thinking tired,
  He through a little window cast his sight,
  Though thick of bars, that gave a scanty light:     
  But even that glimmering served him to descry
  The inevitable charms of Emily.

RHYME a a *

    Scarce had he seen, but seized with sudden smart,
  Stung to the quick, he felt it at his heart;
  Struck blind with overpowering light he stood,
  Then started back amazed, and cried aloud.

RHYME a a *

    Young Arcite heard; and up he ran with haste,
  To help his friend, and in his arms embraced;
  And ask'd him why he look'd so deadly wan,
  And whence and how his change of cheer began?       
  Or who had done the offence? But if, said he,
  Your grief alone is hard captivity;
  For love of Heaven, with patience undergo
  A cureless ill, since Fate will have it so:
  So stood our horoscope in chains to lie,
  And Saturn in the dungeon of the sky,
  Or other baleful aspect, ruled our birth,
  When all the friendly stars were under earth:
  Whate'er betides, by Destiny 'tis done;
  And better bear like men, than vainly seek to shun. 
  Nor of my bonds, said Palamon again,
  Nor of unhappy planets I complain;
  But when my mortal anguish caused my cry,
  That moment I was hurt through either eye;
 
RHYME a a *

 Pierced with a random shaft, I faint away,
  And perish with insensible decay;
  A glance of some new goddess gave the wound,
  Whom, like Actaeon, unaware I found.

RHYME a a a

  Look how she walks along yon shady space!
  Not Juno moves with more majestic grace;            
  And all the Cyprian queen is in her face.

RHYME a a *

  If thou art Venus (for thy charms confess
  That face was form'd in heaven, nor art thou less
  Disguised in habit, undisguised in shape),
  Oh, help us captives from our chains to 'scape!
  But if our doom be past in bonds to lie
  For life, and in a loathsome dungeon die,
  Then be thy wrath appeased with our disgrace,
  And show compassion to the Theban race,
  Oppress'd by tyrant power! While yet he spoke,      
  Arcite on Emily had fix'd his look;

RHYME a a *

  The fatal dart a ready passage found,
  And deep within his heart infix'd the wound:
  So that if Palamon were wounded sore,
  Arcite was hurt as much as he, or more:
  Then from his inmost soul he sigh'd, and said,
  The beauty I behold has struck me dead:
  Unknowingly she strikes; and kills by chance;
  Poison is in her eyes, and death in every glance.
  Oh, I must ask; nor ask alone, but move             
  Her mind to mercy, or must die for love!
  Thus Arcite: and thus Palamon replies,
  (Eager his tone and ardent were his eyes):

RHYME a a a

  Speak'st thou in earnest, or in jesting vein?
  Jesting, said Arcite, suits but ill with pain.
  It suits far worse (said Palamon again,

RHYME a a *

  And bent his brows) with men who honour weigh,
  Their faith to break, their friendship to betray;
  But worst with thee, of noble lineage born,
  My kinsman, and in arms my brother sworn.           
  Have we not plighted each our holy oath,
  That one should be the common good of both;

RHYME a a *

  One soul should both inspire, and neither prove
  His fellow's hindrance in pursuit of love?
  To this before the gods we gave our hands,
  And nothing but our death can break the bands.
  This binds thee, then, to further my design,
  As I am bound by vow to further thine:
  Nor canst, nor dar'st thou, traitor, on the plain
  Appeach my honour, or thine own maintain,           
  Since thou art of my council, and the friend
  Whose faith I trust, and on whose care depend:
  And would'st thou court my lady's love, which I
  Much rather than release would choose to die?
  But thou, false Arcite, never shall obtain
  Thy bad pretence; I told thee first my pain;
  For first my love began ere thine was born:
  Thou as my council, and my brother sworn,
  Art bound to assist my eldership of right,
  Or justly to be deem'd a perjured knight.           

RHYME a a *

    Thus Palamon: but Arcite with disdain
  In haughty language thus replied again:
  Forsworn thyself: the traitor's odious name
  I first return, and then disprove thy claim.
  If love be passion, and that passion nursed
  With strong desires, I loved the lady first.
  Canst thou pretend desire, whom zeal inflamed
  To worship, and a power celestial named?
  Thine was devotion to the blest above,
  I saw the woman and desired her love;               
  First own'd my passion, and to thee commend
  The important secret, as my chosen friend.
  Suppose (which yet I grant not) thy desire
  A moment elder than my rival fire;
  Can chance of seeing first thy title prove?
  And know'st thou not, no law is made for love?
  Law is to things which to free choice relate;
  Love is not in our choice, but in our fate;

RHYME a a *

  Laws are but positive; love's power, we see,
  Is Nature's sanction, and her first decree.         
  Each day we break the bond of human laws
  For love, and vindicate the common cause.
  Laws for defence of civil rights are placed,
  Love throws the fences down, and makes a general waste;
  Maids, widows, wives, without distinction fall;
  The sweeping deluge, love, comes on, and covers all.

RHYME a a a

  If, then, the laws of friendship I transgress,
  I keep the greater, while I break the less;
  And both are mad alike, since neither can possess.

RHYME a a *

  Both hopeless to be ransom'd, never more            
  To see the sun, but as he passes o'er.
    Like AEsop's hounds contending for the bone,
  Each pleaded right, and would be lord alone:
  The fruitless fight continued all the day;
  A cur came by, and snatch'd the prize away.
  As courtiers, therefore, jostle for a grant,
  And when they break their friendship, plead their want;
  So thou, if fortune will thy suit advance,
  Love on, nor envy me my equal chance;
  For I must love, and am resolved to try             
  My fate, or, failing in the adventure, die.

RHYME a a *

    Great was their strife, which hourly was renew'd,
  Till each with mortal hate his rival view'd;
  Now friends no more, nor walking hand in hand;
  But when they met, they made a surly stand;
  And glared like angry lions as they pass'd,
  And wish'd that every look might be their last.

RHYME a a *

    It chanced at length, Pirithous came to attend
  This worthy Theseus, his familiar friend:
  Their love in early infancy began,                  
  And rose as childhood ripen'd into man.

RHYME a a a

  Companions of the war; and loved so well,
  That when one died, as ancient stories tell,
  His fellow to redeem him went to Hell.

RHYME a a *

    But to pursue my tale; to welcome home
  His warlike brother is Pirithous come:
  Arcite of Thebes was known in arms long since,
  And honour'd by this young Thessalian prince.
  Theseus, to gratify his friend and guest,
  Who made our Arcite's freedom his request,          
  Restored to liberty the captive knight,
  But on these hard conditions I recite:
  That if hereafter Arcite should be found
  Within the compass of Athenian ground,
  By day or night, or on whate'er pretence,
  His head should pay the forfeit of the offence.
  To this Pirithous for his friend agreed,
  And on his promise was the prisoner freed.

RHYME a a *

    Unpleased and pensive hence he takes his way,
  At his own peril; for his life must pay.            
  Who now but Arcite mourns his bitter fate,
  Finds his dear purchase, and repents too late?
  What have I gain'd, he said, in prison pent,
  If I but change my bonds for banishment?
  And banish'd from her sight, I suffer more
  In freedom than I felt in bonds before;
  Forced from her presence, and condemn'd to live:
  Unwelcome freedom, and unthank'd reprieve!
 
RHYME a a *

 Heaven is not, but where Emily abides,
  And where she's absent, all is hell besides.        
  Next to my day of birth, was that accursed,
  Which bound my friendship to Pirithous first:
  Had I not known that prince, I still had been
  In bondage, and had still Emilia seen:
  For though I never can her grace deserve,
  'Tis recompence enough to see and serve.
  O Palamon, my kinsman and my friend,
  How much more happy fates thy love attend!
  Thine is the adventure; thine the victory:
  Well has thy fortune turn'd the dice for thee:      
  Thou on that angel's face may'st feed thine eyes,
  In prison, no; but blissful paradise!
  Thou daily seest that sun of beauty shine,
  And lovest at least in love's extremest line.

RHYME a a a

  I mourn in absence, love's eternal night;
  And who can tell but since thou hast her sight,
  And art a comely, young, and valiant knight,

RHYME a a *

  Fortune (a various power) may cease to frown,
  And by some ways unknown thy wishes crown?
  But I, the most forlorn of human kind,              
  Nor help can hope, nor remedy can find;
  But doom'd to drag my loathsome life in care,
  For my reward, must end it in despair.
  Fire, water, air, and earth, and force of fates,
  That governs all, and Heaven that all creates,
  Nor art, nor nature's hand can ease my grief;
  Nothing but death, the wretch's last relief:
  Then farewell youth, and all the joys that dwell,
  With youth and life, and life itself farewell!

RHYME a a *

    But why, alas! do mortal men in vain              
  Of fortune, fate, or Providence complain?
  God gives us what he knows our wants require,
  And better things than those which we desire:
  Some pray for riches; riches they obtain;
  But, watch'd by robbers, for their wealth are slain:
  Some pray from prison to be freed; and come,
  When guilty of their vows, to fall at home;
  Murder'd by those they trusted with their life,
  A favour'd servant, or a bosom wife.

RHYME a a *

  Such dear-bought blessings happen every day,        
  Because we know not for what things to pray.
  Like drunken sots about the street we roam;
  Well knows the sot he has a certain home;
  Yet knows not how to find the uncertain place,
  And blunders on, and staggers every pace.
  Thus all seek happiness; but few can find.
  For far the greater part of men are blind.
  This is my case, who thought our utmost good
  Was in one word of freedom understood:
  The fatal blessing came: from prison free,          
  I starve abroad, and lose the sight of Emily.

RHYME a a *

    Thus Arcite; but if Arcite thus deplore
  His sufferings, Palamon yet suffers more.
  For when he knew his rival freed and gone,
  He swells with wrath; he makes outrageous moan:
  He frets, he fumes, he stares, he stamps the ground;
  The hollow tower with clamours rings around:
  With briny tears he bathed his fetter'd feet,
  And dropp'd all o'er with agony of sweat.
  Alas! he cried, I wretch in prison pine,            
  Too happy rival, while the fruit is thine:

RHYME a a *

  Thou livest at large, thou draw'st thy native air,
  Pleased with thy freedom, proud of my despair:
  Thou may'st, since thou hast youth and courage join'd,
  A sweet behaviour and a solid mind,
  Assemble ours, and all the Theban race,
  To vindicate on Athens thy disgrace;
  And after, by some treaty made, possess
  Fair Emily, the pledge of lasting peace.
  So thine shall be the beauteous prize, while I      
  Must languish in despair, in prison die.
  Thus all the advantage of the strife is thine,
  Thy portion double joys, and double sorrows mine.

RHYME a a *

    The rage of jealousy then fired his soul,
  And his face kindled like a burning coal:
  Now cold despair, succeeding in her stead,
  To livid paleness turns the glowing red.
  His blood, scarce liquid, creeps within his veins,
  Like water which the freezing wind constrains.
  Then thus he said: Eternal Deities,                 
  Who rule the world with absolute decrees,
  And write whatever time shall bring to pass,
  With pens of adamant on plates of brass;
  What! is the race of human kind your care,
  Beyond what all his fellow-creatures are?

RHYME a a *

  He with the rest is liable to pain,
  And like the sheep, his brother-beast, is slain;
  Cold, hunger, prisons, ills without a cure,
  All these he must, and guiltless, oft endure.
  Or does your justice, power, or prescience fail,    
  When the good suffer, and the bad prevail?
  What worse to wretched virtue could befall,
  If fate or giddy fortune govern'd all?
  Nay, worse than other beasts is our estate;
  Them, to pursue their pleasures, you create;
  We, bound by harder laws, must curb our will,
  And your commands, not our desires, fulfil;

RHYME a a *

  Then when the creature is unjustly slain,
  Yet after death, at least, he feels no pain;
  But man, in life surcharged with woe before,        
  Not freed when dead, is doom'd to suffer more.
  A serpent shoots his sting at unaware;
  An ambush'd thief forelays a traveller:
  The man lies murder'd, while the thief and snake,
  One gains the thickets, and one threads the brake.
  This let divines decide; but well I know,
  Just, or unjust, I have my share of woe,
  Through Saturn seated in a luckless place,
  And Juno's wrath, that persecutes my race;
  Or Mars and Venus, in a quartile, move              
  My pangs of jealousy for Arcite's love.

RHYME a a *

    Let Palamon oppress'd in bondage mourn,
  While to his exiled rival we return.
  By this, the sun, declining from his height,
  The day had shorten'd to prolong the night;
  The lengthen'd night gave length of misery
  Both to the captive lover and the free.
  For Palamon in endless prison mourns,
  And Arcite forfeits life if he returns:
  The banish'd never hopes his love to see,           
  Nor hopes the captive lord his liberty.
  'Tis hard to say who suffers greater pains:
  One sees his love, but cannot break his chains:
  One free, and all his motions uncontroll'd,
  Beholds whate'er he would, but what he would behold.
  Judge as you please, for I will haste to tell
  What fortune to the banish'd knight befell.

RHYME a a *

    When Arcite was to Thebes return'd again,
  The loss of her he loved renew'd his pain;
  What could be worse, than never more to see         
  His life, his soul, his charming Emily?
  He raved with all the madness of despair,
  He roar'd, he beat his breast, he tore his hair.
  Dry sorrow in his stupid eyes appears,
  For, wanting nourishment, he wanted tears:
  His eye-balls in their hollow sockets sink,
  Bereft of sleep, he loathes his meat and drink.
  He withers at his heart, and looks as wan
  As the pale spectre of a murder'd man:

RHYME a a *

  That pale turns yellow, and his face receives       
  The faded hue of sapless boxen leaves:
  In solitary groves he makes his moan,
  Walks early out, and ever is alone:
  Nor, mix'd in mirth, in youthful pleasures shares,
  But sighs when songs and instruments he hears.

RHYME a a a

  His spirits are so low, his voice is drown'd,
  He hears as from afar, or in a swound,
  Like the deaf murmurs of a distant sound:

RHYME a a *

  Uncomb'd his locks and squalid his attire,
  Unlike the trim of love and gay desire;             
  But full of museful mopings, which presage
  The loss of reason, and conclude in rage.

RHYME a a *

    This when he had endured a year and more,
  Now wholly changed from what he was before,
  It happen'd once, that, slumbering as he lay,
  He dream'd (his dream began at break of day)
  That Hermes o'er his head in air appear'd,
  And with soft words his drooping spirits cheer'd:
  His hat, adorn'd with wings, disclosed the god,
  And in his hand he bore the sleep-compelling rod:   
  Such as he seem'd, when, at his sire's command,
  On Argus' head he laid the snaky wand.
  Arise, he said, to conquering Athens go,
  There fate appoints an end to all thy woe.

RHYME a a *

  The fright awaken'd Arcite with a start,
  Against his bosom bounced his heaving heart;
  But soon he said, with scarce-recover'd breath,
  And thither will I go, to meet my death.
  Sure to be slain; but death is my desire,
  Since in Emilia's sight I shall expire.             
  By chance he spied a mirror while he spoke,
  And gazing there, beheld his alter'd look;
  Wondering, he saw his features and his hue
  So much were changed, that scarce himself he knew.
  A sudden thought then starting in his mind,
  Since I in Arcite cannot Arcite find,
  The world may search in vain with all their eyes,
  But never penetrate through this disguise.
  Thanks to the change which grief and sickness give,
  In low estate I may securely live,                  

RHYME a a *

  And see unknown my mistress day by day.
  He said; and clothed himself in coarse array:
  A labouring hind in show; then forth he went,
  And to the Athenian towers his journey bent:
  One squire attended in the same disguise,
  Made conscious of his master's enterprise.
  Arrived at Athens, soon he came to court,
  Unknown, unquestion'd in that thick resort:
  Proffering for hire his service at the gate,
  To drudge, draw water, and to run or wait.          

RHYME a a *

    So fair befell him, that for little gain
  He served at first Emilia's chamberlain;
  And, watchful all advantages to spy,
  Was still at hand, and in his master's eye;
  And as his bones were big, and sinews strong,
  Refused no toil that could to slaves belong;
  But from deep wells with engines water drew,
  And used his noble hands the wood to hew.
  He pass'd a year at least attending thus
  On Emily, and call'd Philostratus.                  
  But never was there man of his degree
  So much esteem'd, so well beloved as he.
  So gentle of condition was he known,
  That through the court his courtesy was blown:

RHYME a a *

  All think him worthy of a greater place,
  And recommend him to the royal grace;
  That, exercised within a higher sphere,
  His virtues more conspicuous might appear.
  Thus by the general voice was Arcite praised,
  And by great Theseus to high favour raised;         
  Among his menial servants first enroll'd,
  And largely entertain'd with sums of gold:
  Besides what secretly from Thebes was sent,
  Of his own income, and his annual rent:
  This well employ'd, he purchased friends and fame,
  But cautiously conceal'd from whence it came.
  Thus for three years he lived with large increase,
  In arms of honour, and esteem in peace;
  To Theseus' person he was ever near;
  And Theseus for his virtues held him dear.          

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  While Arcite lives in bliss, the story turns
  Where hopeless Palamon in prison mourns.
  For six long years immured, the captive knight
  Had dragg'd his chains, and scarcely seen the light:
  Lost liberty and love at once he bore:
  His prison pain'd him much, his passion more:
  Nor dares he hope his fetters to remove,
  Nor ever wishes to be free from love.

RHYME a a *

    But when the sixth revolving year was run,
  And May within the Twins received the sun,                
  Were it by chance, or forceful destiny,
  Which forms in causes first whate'er shall be,
  Assisted by a friend, one moonless night,
  This Palamon from prison took his flight:
  A pleasant beverage he prepared before
  Of wine and honey, mix'd with added store
  Of opium; to his keeper this he brought,
  Who swallow'd unaware the sleepy draught,
  And snored secure till morn, his senses bound
  In slumber, and in long oblivion drown'd.                 
  Short was the night, and careful Palamon
  Sought the next covert e'er the rising sun.

RHYME a a a

  A thick-spread forest near the city lay,
  To this with lengthen'd strides he took his way,
  (For far he could not fly, and fear'd the day).

RHYME a a a

  Safe from pursuit, he meant to shun the light,
  Till the brown shadows of the friendly night
  To Thebes might favour his intended flight.

RHYME a a *

  When to his country come, his next design
  Was all the Theban race in arms to join,                  
  And war on Theseus, till he lost his life,
  Or won the beauteous Emily to wife.

RHYME a a *

    Thus while his thoughts the lingering day beguile,
  To gentle Arcite let us turn our style;
  Who little dreamt how nigh he was to care,
  Till treacherous fortune caught him in the snare.
  The morning lark, the messenger of day,
  Saluted in her song the morning gray;
  And soon the sun arose with beams so bright,
  That all the horizon laugh'd to see the joyous sight:     
  He with his tepid rays the rose renews,
  And licks the drooping leaves, and dries the dews;
  When Arcite left his bed, resolved to pay
  Observance to the month of merry May:
  Forth on his fiery steed betimes he rode,
  That scarcely prints the turf on which he trode:
  At ease he seem'd, and, prancing o'er the plains,
  Turn'd only to the grove his horse's reins,
  The grove I named before; and, lighted there,
  A woodbine garland sought to crown his hair;              
  Then turn'd his face against the rising day,
  And raised his voice to welcome in the May.

RHYME a a *

    For thee, sweet month! the groves green liveries wear,
  If not the first, the fairest of the year:
  For thee the Graces lead the dancing hours,
  And Nature's ready pencil paints the flowers:
  When thy short reign is past, the feverish sun
  The sultry tropic fears, and moves more slowly on.
  So may thy tender blossoms fear no blight,
  Nor goats with venom'd teeth thy tendrils bite,           
  As thou shalt guide my wandering feet to find
  The fragrant greens I seek, my brows to bind.

RHYME a a a

    His vows address'd, within the grove he stray'd,
  Till Fate, or Fortune, near the place convey'd
  His steps where, secret, Palamon was laid.

RHYME a a a

  Full little thought of him the gentle knight,
  Who, flying death, had there conceal'd his flight,
  In brakes and brambles hid, and shunning mortal sight:

RHYME a a *

  And less he knew him for his hated foe,
  But fear'd him as a man he did not know.                  
  But as it has been said of ancient years,
  That fields are full of eyes, and woods have ears;
  For this the wise are ever on their guard,
  For, unforeseen, they say, is unprepared.
  Uncautious Arcite thought himself alone,
  And less than all suspected Palamon,
  Who, listening, heard him, while he search'd the grove,
  And loudly sung his roundelay of love:
  But on the sudden stopp'd, and silent stood,
  As lovers often muse, and change their mood;

RHYME a a *

  Now high as heaven, and then as low as hell;
  Now up, now down, as buckets in a well:
  For Venus, like her day, will change her cheer,
  And seldom shall we see a Friday clear.
  Thus Arcite having sung, with alter'd hue
  Sunk on the ground, and from his bosom drew
  A desperate sigh, accusing Heaven and Fate,
  And angry Juno's unrelenting hate.

RHYME a a a

  Cursed be the day when first I did appear;
  Let it be blotted from the calendar,                      
  Lest it pollute the month, and poison all the year!

RHYME a a *

  Still will the jealous queen pursue our race?
  Cadmus is dead, the Theban city was:

RHYME a a *

  Yet ceases not her hate: for all who come
  From Cadmus are involved in Cadmus' doom.
  I suffer for my blood: unjust decree!
  That punishes another's crime on me.
  In mean estate I serve my mortal foe,
  The man who caused my country's overthrow.

RHYME a a a

  This is not all; for Juno, to my shame,             
  Has forced me to forsake my former name;
  Arcite I was, Philostratus I am.

RHYME a a *

  That side of heaven is all my enemy:
  Mars ruin'd Thebes: his mother ruin'd me.
  Of all the royal race remains but one
  Besides myself, the unhappy Palamon,
  Whom Theseus holds in bonds, and will not free;
  Without a crime, except his kin to me.
  Yet these, and all the rest, I could endure;
  But love's a malady without a cure:                 
  Fierce love has pierced me with his fiery dart;
  He fires within, and hisses at my heart.
  Your eyes, fair Emily, my fate pursue;
  I suffer for the rest, I die for you!
  Of such a goddess no time leaves record,
  Who burn'd the temple where she was adored:
  And let it burn, I never will complain,
  Pleased with my sufferings, if you knew my pain.

RHYME a a *

    At this a sickly qualm his heart assail'd,
  His ears ring inward, and his senses fail'd.        
  No word miss'd Palamon of all he spoke,
  But soon to deadly pale he changed his look:
  He trembled every limb, and felt a smart,
  As if cold steel had glided through his heart;
  No longer staid, but starting from his place,
  Discover'd stood, and show'd his hostile face:
  False traitor, Arcite! traitor to thy blood!
  Bound by thy sacred oath to seek my good,
  Now art thou found forsworn, for Emily;
  And darest attempt her love, for whom I die.        
  So hast thou cheated Theseus with a wile,
  Against thy vow, returning to beguile
  Under a borrow'd name: as false to me,
  So false thou art to him who set thee free.
  But rest assured, that either thou shalt die,
  Or else renounce thy claim in Emily:
  For though unarm'd I am, and (freed by chance)
  Am here without my sword, or pointed lance,
  Hope not, base man, unquestioned hence to go,
  For I am Palamon, thy mortal foe.                   

RHYME a a *

    Arcite, who heard his tale, and knew the man,
  His sword unsheath'd, and fiercely thus began:
  Now by the gods who govern heaven above,
  Wert thou not weak with hunger, mad with love,
  That word had been thy last, or in this grove
  This hand should force thee to renounce thy love.

RHYME a a a

  The surety which I gave thee, I defy:
  Fool, not to know that love endures no tie,
  And Jove but laughs at lovers' perjury.

RHYME a a *

  Know I will serve the fair in thy despite;          
  But since thou art my kinsman, and a knight,
  Here, have my faith, to-morrow in this grove
  Our arms shall plead the titles of our love:
  And Heaven so help my right, as I alone
  Will come, and keep the cause and quarrel both unknown;
  With arms of proof both for myself and thee;
  Choose thou the best, and leave the worst to me.
  And, that at better ease thou may'st abide,
  Bedding and clothes I will this night provide,
  And needful sustenance, that thou may'st be         
  A conquest better won, and worthy me.
  His promise Palamon accepts; but pray'd
  To keep it better than the first he made.
  Thus fair they parted till the morrow's dawn,
  For each had laid his plighted faith to pawn.

RHYME a a a

  Oh, Love! thou sternly dost thy power maintain,
  And wilt not bear a rival in thy reign;
  Tyrants and thou all fellowship disdain!

RHYME a a * 

 This was in Arcite proved, and Palamon,
  Both in despair, yet each would love alone.         
  Arcite return'd, and, as in honour tied,
  His foe with bedding, and with food supplied;
  Then, ere the day, two suits of armour sought,
  Which, borne before him on his steed, he brought:
  Both were of shining steel, and wrought so pure,
  As might the strokes of two such arms endure.
  Now, at the time, and in the appointed place,
  The challenger and challenged, face to face,
  Approach; each other from afar they knew,
  And from afar their hatred changed their hue.       
  So stands the Thracian herdsman with his spear,
  Pull in the gap, and hopes the hunted bear,
  And hears him rustling in the wood, and sees
  His course at distance by the bending trees;
  And thinks, Here comes my mortal enemy,
  And either he must fall in fight, or I:

RHYME a a a

  This while he thinks, he lifts aloft his dart;
  A generous chilness seizes every part:
  The veins pour back the blood, and fortify the heart.

RHYME a a *

    Thus pale they meet; their eyes with fury burn;   
  None greets; for none the greeting will return:
  But in dumb surliness, each arm'd with care
  His foe profess'd, as brother of the war:
  Then both, no moment lost, at once advance
  Against each other, arm'd with sword and lance:
  They lash, they foin, they pass, they strive to bore
  Their corslets and the thinnest parts explore.
  Thus two long hours in equal arms they stood,
  And wounded, wound, till both were bathed in blood;
  And not a foot of ground had either got,            
  As if the world depended on the spot.
  Fell Arcite like an angry tiger fared,
  And like a lion Palamon appear'd:
  Or, as two boars, whom love to battle draws,
  With rising bristles, and with frothy jaws,
  Their adverse breasts with tusks oblique they wound;
  With grunts and groans the forest rings around.
  So fought the knights, and fighting must abide,
  Till fate an umpire sends their difference to decide.

RHYME a a *

    The power that ministers to God's decrees,        
  And executes on earth what Heaven foresees,
  Call'd providence, or chance, or fatal sway,
  Comes with resistless force, and finds or makes her way.
  Nor kings, nor nations, nor united power,
  One moment can retard the appointed hour;
  And some one day, some wondrous chance appears,
  Which happen'd not in centuries of years:
  For sure, whate'er we mortals hate, or love,
  Or hope, or fear, depends on Powers above;
  They move our appetites to good or ill,             
  And by foresight necessitate the will.
  In Theseus this appears; whose youthful joy
  Was beasts of chase in forests to destroy:

RHYME a a a

  This gentle knight, inspired by jolly May,
  Forsook his easy couch at early day,
  And to the wood and wilds pursued his way.

RHYME a a *

  Beside him rode Hippolita the queen,
  And Emily attired in lively green,
  With horns, and hounds, and all the tuneful cry,
  To hunt a royal hart within the covert nigh:        
  And as he follow'd Mars before, so now
  He serves the goddess of the silver bow.
  The way that Theseus took was to the wood
  Where the two knights in cruel battle stood:
  The lawn on which they fought, the appointed place
  In which the uncoupled hounds began the chase.
  Thither forth-right he rode to rouse the prey,
  That, shaded by the fern, in harbour lay;
  And thence dislodged, was wont to leave the wood
  For open fields, and cross the crystal flood.       
  Approach'd, and looking underneath the sun,
  He saw proud Arcite, and fierce Palamon,
  In mortal battle doubling blow on blow,
  Like lightning flamed their falchions to and fro,
  And shot a dreadful gleam; so strong they strook,
  There seem'd less force required to fell an oak:
  He gazed with wonder on their equal might,
  Look'd eager on, but knew not either knight:
  Resolved to learn, he spurr'd his fiery steed
  With goring rowels to provoke his speed.            
  The minute ended that began the race,
  So soon he was betwixt them on the place;
  And, with his sword unsheath'd, on pain of life
  Commands both combatants to cease their strife:
  Then with imperious tone pursues his threat:
  What are you? why in arms together met?

RHYME a a *

  How dares your pride presume against my laws,
  As in a listed field to fight your cause?
  Unask'd the royal grant; no marshal by,
  As knightly rites require; nor judge to try?        
  Then Palamon, with scarce recover'd breath,
  Thus hasty spoke: We both deserve the death,
  And both would die; for look the world around,
  A pair so wretched is not to be found;
  Our life's a load; encumber'd with the charge,
  We long to set the imprison'd soul at large.

RHYME a a a

  Now, as thou art a sovereign judge, decree
  The rightful doom of death to him and me;
  Let neither find thy grace, for grace is cruelty.

RHYME a a *

  Me first, oh, kill me first, and cure my woe;       
  Then sheath the sword of justice on my foe:
  Or kill him first; for when his name is heard,
  He foremost will receive his due reward.
  Arcite of Thebes is he; thy mortal foe:
  On whom thy grace did liberty bestow,

RHYME a a *

  But first contracted, that if ever found
  By day or night upon the Athenian ground,
  His head should pay the forfeit; see return'd
  The perjured knight, his oath and honour scorn'd.
  For this is he, who, with a borrow'd name           
  And proffer'd service, to thy palace came,

RHYME a a a

  Now call'd Philostratus: retain'd by thee,
  A traitor trusted, and in high degree,
  Aspiring to the bed of beauteous Emily.

RHYME a a *

  My part remains; from Thebes my birth I own,
  And call myself the unhappy Palamon.
  Think me not like that man; since no disgrace
  Can force me to renounce the honour of my race.
  Know me for what I am: I broke my chain,
  Nor promised I thy prisoner to remain:              
  The love of liberty with life is given,
  And life itself the inferior gift of Heaven.
  Thus without crime I fled; but further know,
  I, with this Arcite, am thy mortal foe:
  Then give me death, since I thy life pursue;
  For safeguard of thyself, death is my due.
  More would'st thou know? I love bright Emily,
  And, for her sake, and in her sight will die:

RHYME a a a

  But kill my rival too; for he no less
  Deserves; and I thy righteous doom will bless,      
  Assured that what I lose, he never shall possess.

RHYME a a *

    To this replied the stern Athenian prince,
  And sourly smiled: In owning your offence
  You judge yourself; and I but keep record
  In place of law, while you pronounce the word.
  Take your desert, the death you have decreed;
  I seal your doom, and ratify the deed:
  By Mars, the patron of my arms, you die!
    He said; dumb sorrow seized the standers-by.
  The queen above the rest, by nature good,           
  (The pattern form'd of perfect womanhood)
  For tender pity wept: when she began,
  Through the bright quire the infectious virtue ran.
  All dropt their tears, even the contended maid;
  And thus among themselves they softly said:
  What eyes can suffer this unworthy sight!
  Two youths of royal blood, renown'd in fight,
  The mastership of Heaven in face and mind,
  And lovers, far beyond their faithless kind:
  See their wide streaming wounds; they neither came  
  For pride of empire, nor desire of fame:
  Kings fight for kingdoms, madmen for applause;
  But love for love alone; that crowns the lover's cause.
  This thought, which ever bribes the beauteous kind,
  Such pity wrought in every lady's mind,
  They left their steeds, and, prostrate on the place,
  From the fierce king implored the offenders' grace.

RHYME a a *

    He paused a while, stood silent in his mood
  (For yet his rage was boiling in his blood);
  But soon his tender mind the impression felt,       
  (As softest metals are not slow to melt,
  And pity soonest runs in softest minds):
  Then reasons with himself; and first he finds
  His passion cast a mist before his sense,
  And either made, or magnified the offence.
  Offence! of what? to whom? who judged the cause?
  The prisoner freed himself by nature's laws:
  Born free, he sought his right: the man he freed
  Was perjured, but his love excused the deed.
  Thus pondering, he look'd under with his eyes,      
  And saw the women's tears, and heard their cries;
  Which moved compassion more; he shook his head,
  And, softly sighing, to himself he said:
  Curse on the unpardoning prince, whom tears can draw
  To no remorse; who rules by lions' law;

RHYME a a *

  And deaf to prayers, by no submission bow'd,
  Rends all alike; the penitent, and proud!
  At this, with look serene, he raised his head;
  Reason resumed her place, and passion fled:
  Then thus aloud he spoke: The power of love,        
  In earth, and seas, and air, and heaven above,
  Rules, unresisted, with an awful nod;
  By daily miracles declared a god:
  He blinds the wise, gives eyesight to the blind;
  And moulds and stamps anew the lover's mind.
  Behold that Arcite, and this Palamon,
  Freed from my fetters, and in safety gone,
  What hinder'd either in their native soil
  At ease to reap the harvest of their toil?
  But Love, their lord, did otherwise ordain,         
  And brought them in their own despite again,
  To suffer death deserved; for well they know,
  'Tis in my power, and I their deadly foe.
  The proverb holds, that to be wise and love,
  Is hardly granted to the gods above.

RHYME a a *

  See how the madmen bleed! behold the gains
  With which their master, Love, rewards their pains!
  For seven long years, on duty every day,
  Lo, their obedience, and their monarch's pay:
  Yet, as in duty bound, they serve him on;           
  And, ask the fools, they think it wisely done;
  Nor ease, nor wealth, nor life itself regard,
  For 'tis their maxim, Love is love's reward.
  This is not all; the fair, for whom they strove,
  Nor knew before, nor could suspect their love;
  Nor thought, when she beheld the sight from far,
  Her beauty was the occasion of the war.
  But sure a general doom on man is past,
  And all are fools and lovers, first or last:
  This both by others and myself I know,              
  For I have served their sovereign long ago;

RHYME a a a

  Oft have been caught within the winding train
  Of female snares, and felt the lover's pain,
  And learn'd how far the god can human hearts constrain.

RHYME a a *

  To this remembrance, and the prayers of those
  Who for the offending warriors interpose,
  I give their forfeit lives; on this accord,
  To do me homage as their sovereign lord;
  And, as my vassals, to their utmost might,
  Assist my person, and assert my right.              

RHYME a a *

    This freely sworn, the knights their grace obtain'd;
  Then thus the king his secret thoughts explain'd:
  If wealth, or honour, or a royal race,
  Or each, or all, may win a lady's grace,
  Then either of you knights may well deserve
  A princess born; and such is she you serve:
  For Emily is sister to the crown,
  And but too well to both her beauty known:
  But should you combat till you both were dead,
  Two lovers cannot share a single bed:               
  As, therefore, both are equal in degree,
  The lot of both be left to destiny.
  Now hear the award, and happy may it prove
  To her, and him who best deserves her love.
  Depart from hence in peace, and, free as air,
  Search the wide world, and where you please repair;
  But on the day when this returning sun
  To the same point through every sign has run,

RHYME a a *

  Then each of you his hundred knights shall bring,
  In royal lists, to fight before the king;           
  And then the knight, whom fate or happy chance
  Shall with his friends to victory advance,
  And grace his arms so far in equal fight,
  From out the bars to force his opposite,
  Or kill, or make him recreant on the plain,
  The prize of valour and of love shall gain;
  The vanquish'd party shall their claim release,
  And the long jars conclude in lasting peace.
  The charge be mine to adorn the chosen ground,
  The theatre of war, for champions so renown'd;      

RHYME a a a

  And take the patron's place of either knight,
  With eyes impartial to behold the fight;
  And Heaven of me so judge as I shall judge aright.

RHYME a a *

  If both are satisfied with this accord,
  Swear by the laws of knighthood on my sword.

RHYME a a *

    Who now but Palamon exults with joy?
  And ravish'd Arcite seems to touch the sky:
  The whole assembled troop was pleased as well,
  Extol the award, and on their knees they fell
  To bless the gracious king. The knights, with leave,
  Departing from the place, his last commands receive;
  On Emily with equal ardour look,
  And from her eyes their inspiration took.
  From thence to Thebes' old walls pursue their way,
  Each to provide his champions for the day.

RHYME a a *

    It might be deem'd, on our historian's part,
  Or too much negligence, or want of art,
  If he forgot the vast magnificence
  Of royal Theseus, and his large expense,
  He first enclosed for lists a level ground,         
  The whole circumference a mile around;
  The form was circular; and all without
  A trench was sunk, to moat the place about.
  Within an amphitheatre appear'd,
  Raised in degrees; to sixty paces rear'd:
  That when a man was placed in one degree,
  Height was allow'd for him above to see.

RHYME a a *

    Eastward was built a gate of marble white;
  The like adorn'd the western opposite.
  A nobler object than this fabric was,               
  Rome never saw; nor of so vast a space.
  For rich with spoils of many a conquer'd land,
  All arts and artists Theseus could command;
  Who sold for hire, or wrought for better fame;
  The master-painters, and the carvers came.
  So rose within the compass of the year
  An age's work, a glorious theatre.
  Then o'er its eastern gate was raised above
  A temple, sacred to the Queen of Love;
  An altar stood below: on either hand                
  A priest with roses crown'd, who held a myrtle wand.
    The dome of Mars was on the gate opposed,
  And on the north a turret was enclosed,

RHYME a a a

  Within the wall, of alabaster white,
  And crimson coral, for the Queen of Night,
  Who takes in sylvan sports her chaste delight.

RHYME a a *

    Within these oratories might you see
  Rich carvings, portraitures, and imagery:
  Where every figure to the life express'd
  The godhead's power to whom it was address'd.       
  In Venus' temple on the sides were seen
  The broken slumbers of enamour'd men;
  Prayers that even spoke, and pity seem'd to call,
  And issuing sighs that smoked along the wall;
  Complaints, and hot desires, the lover's hell,
  And scalding tears that wore a channel where they fell:

RHYME a a a

  And all around were nuptial bonds, the ties,
  Of love's assurance, and a train of lies,
  That, made in lust, conclude in perjuries.

RHYME a a *

  Beauty, and Youth, and Wealth, and Luxury,          
  And spritely Hope, and short-enduring Joy;
  And Sorceries to raise the infernal powers,
  And Sigils framed in planetary hours:
  Expense, and After-Thought, and idle Care,
  And Doubts of motley hue, and dark Despair;
  Suspicious, and fantastical Surmise,
  And Jealousy suffused, with jaundice in her eyes,
  Discolouring all she view'd, in tawny dress'd,
  Down-look'd, and with a cuckoo on her fist.
  Opposed to her, on the other side advance           
  The costly feast, the carol, and the dance,

RHYME a a *

  Minstrels and Music, Poetry and Play,
  And balls by night, and tournaments by day.
  All these were painted on the wall, and more;
  With acts and monuments of times before:
  And others added by prophetic doom,
  And lovers yet unborn, and loves to come:
  For there the Idalian mount, and Citheron,
  The court of Venus, was in colours drawn:
  Before the palace-gate, in careless dress,          
  And loose array, sat portress Idleness:

RHYME a a a
 
 There, by the fount, Narcissus pined alone;
  There Samson was; with wiser Solomon,
  And all the mighty names by love undone.

RHYME a a *

  Medea's charms were there, Circean feasts,
  With bowls that turn'd enamour'd youths to beasts:
  Here might be seen, that beauty, wealth, and wit,
  And prowess, to the power of love submit:

RHYME a a *

  The spreading snare for all mankind is laid;
  And lovers all betray, and are betray'd.            
  The goddess self some noble hand had wrought;
  Smiling she seem'd, and full of pleasing thought:
  From ocean as she first began to rise,
  And smooth'd the ruffled seas and clear'd the skies;
  She trode the brine, all bare below the breast,
  And the green waves but ill conceal'd the rest;
  A lute she held; and on her head was seen
  A wreath of roses red, and myrtles green;
  Her turtles fann'd the buxom air above;
  And, by his mother, stood an infant Love,           

RHYME a a a

  With wings unfledged; his eyes were banded o'er;
  His hands a bow, his back a quiver bore,
  Supplied with arrows bright and keen, a deadly store.

RHYME a a *

    But in the dome of mighty Mars the red
  With different figures all the sides were spread;
  This temple, less in form, with equal grace,
  Was imitative of the first in Thrace:
  For that cold region was the loved abode
  And sovereign mansion of the warrior god.
  The landscape was a forest wide and bare;           
  Where neither beast, nor human kind repair;
  The fowl, that scent afar, the borders fly,
  And shun the bitter blast, and wheel about the sky.
  A cake of scurf lies baking on the ground,
  And prickly stubs, instead of trees, are found;
  Or woods, with knots and knares, deform'd and old;
  Headless the most, and hideous to behold:
  A rattling tempest through the branches went,
  That stripp'd them bare, and one sole way they bent.

RHYME a a *

  Heaven froze above, severe, the clouds congeal,     
  And through the crystal vault appear'd the standing hail.
  Such was the face without; a mountain stood
  Threatening from high, and overlook'd the wood:
  Beneath the lowering brow, and on a bent,
  The temple stood of Mars armipotent:
  The frame of burnish'd steel, that cast a glare
  From far, and seem'd to thaw the freezing air.
  A strait long entry to the temple led,
  Blind with high walls; and horror over head:
  Thence issued such a blast, and hollow roar,        
  As threaten'd from the hinge to heave the door:
  In through that door, a northern light there shone;
  'Twas all it had, for windows there were none.
  The gate was adamant; eternal frame!
  Which, hew'd by Mars himself, from Indian quarries came,

RHYME a a *

  The labour of a god; and all along
  Tough iron plates were clench'd to make it strong.
  A tun about was every pillar there;
  A polish'd mirror shone not half so clear.

RHYME a a a

  There saw I how the secret felon wrought,           
  And treason labouring in the traitor's thought;
  And midwife Time the ripen'd plot to murder brought.

RHYME a a *

  There the red Anger dared the pallid Fear;
  Next stood Hypocrisy, with holy leer,
  Soft smiling, and demurely looking down,
  But hid the dagger underneath the gown:
  The assassinating wife, the household fiend;
  And far the blackest there, the traitor-friend.
  On the other side, there stood Destruction bare;
  Unpunish'd Rapine, and a waste of War.              
  Contest, with sharpen'd knives, in cloisters drawn,
  And all with blood bespread the holy lawn.

RHYME a a a

  Loud menaces were heard, and foul disgrace,
  And bawling infamy, in language base;
  Till sense was lost in sound, and silence fled the place.

RHYME a a *

  The slayer of himself yet saw I there,
  The gore congeal'd was clotted in his hair;
  With eyes half closed, and gaping mouth he lay,
  And grim, as when he breathed his sullen soul away.
  In midst of all the dome, Misfortune sate,          
  And gloomy Discontent, and fell Debate,
  And Madness laughing in his ireful mood;
  And arm'd complaint on theft; and cries of blood.
  There was the murder'd corpse in covert laid,
  And violent death in thousand shapes display'd:
  The city to the soldiers rage resigned:
  Successless wars, and poverty behind:
  Ships burnt in fight, or forced on rocky shores,
  And the rash hunter strangled by the boars:
  The new-born babe by nurses overlaid;               
  And the cook caught within the raging fire he made.
  All ills of Mars his nature, flame and steel;
  The gasping charioteer, beneath the wheel

RHYME a a *

  Of his own car; the ruin'd house that falls
  And intercepts her lord betwixt the walls:
  The whole division that to Mars pertains,
  All trades of death that deal in steel for gains,
  Were there: the butcher, armourer, and smith,
  Whose forges sharpen'd falchions, or the scythe.
  The scarlet conquest on a tower was placed,         
  With shouts, and soldiers' acclamations graced:
  A pointed sword hung threatening o'er his head,
  Sustain'd but by a slender twine of thread.
  There saw I Mars his ides, the Capitol,
  The seer in vain foretelling Caesar's fall;
  The last triumvirs, and the wars they move,
  And Antony, who lost the world for love.
  These, and a thousand more, the fane adorn;
  Their fates were painted ere the men were born,
  All copied from the heavens, and ruling force       
  Of the red star, in his revolving course.
  The form of Mars high on a chariot stood,
  All sheath'd in arms, and gruffly look'd the god:
  
RHYME a a a

Two geomantic figures were display'd
  Above his head, a warrior and a maid,
  One when direct, and one when retrograde.

RHYME a a *

    Tired with deformities of death, I haste
  To the third temple of Diana chaste.
  A sylvan scene with various greens was drawn,
  Shades on the sides, and in the midst a lawn:       
  The silver Cynthia, with her nymphs around,
  Pursued the flying deer, the woods with horns resound:
  Calisto there stood manifest of shame,
  And, turn'd a bear, the northern star became:
  Her son was next, and, by peculiar grace,
  In the cold circle held the second place:
  The stag Acteon in the stream had spied
  The naked huntress, and, for seeing, died:
  His hounds, unknowing of his change pursue
  The chase, and their mistaken master slew.          
  Peneian Daphne too was there to see,
  Apollo's love before, and now his tree:
  The adjoining fane the assembled Greeks express'd,
  And hunting of the Caledonian beast.

RHYME a a *

  Oenides' valour, and his envied prize;
  The fatal power of Atalanta's eyes;
  Diana's vengeance on the victor shown,
  The murderess mother; and consuming son;
  The Volscian queen extended on the plain;
  The treason punish'd, and the traitor slain.        
  The rest were various huntings, well design'd,
  And savage beasts destroy'd, of every kind.

RHYME a a a
 
 The graceful goddess was array'd in green;
  About her feet were little beagles seen,
  That watch'd with upward eyes the motions of their queen.

RHYME a a a

  Her legs were buskin'd, and the left before,
  In act to shoot; a silver bow she bore,
  And at her back a painted quiver wore.

RHYME a a *

  She trod a waxing moon, that soon would wane,
  And, drinking borrow'd light, be fill'd again:      
  With downcast eyes, as seeming to survey
  The dark dominions, her alternate sway.
  Before her stood a women in her throes,
  And call'd Lucina's aid, her burden to disclose.
  All these the painter drew with such command,
  That Nature snatch'd the pencil from his hand,
  Ashamed and angry that his art could feign
  And mend the tortures of a mother's pain.
  Theseus beheld the fanes of every god,
  And thought his mighty cost was well bestow'd.      
  So princes now their poets should regard;
  But few can write, and fewer can reward.

RHYME a a *

    The theatre thus raised, the lists enclosed,
  And all with vast magnificence disposed,
  We leave the monarch pleased, and haste to bring
  The knights to combat, and their arms to sing.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  The day approach'd when Fortune should decide
  The important enterprise, and give the bride;
  For now, the rivals round the world had sought,
  And each his number, well appointed, brought.
  The nations, far and near, contend in choice,
  And send the flower of war by public voice;
  That after, or before, were never known
  Such chiefs, as each an army seem'd alone:
  Beside the champions, all of high degree,
  Who knighthood loved, and deeds of chivalry,              
  Throng'd to the lists, and envied to behold
  The names of others, not their own, enroll'd.

RHYME a a a

  Nor seems it strange; for every noble knight
  Who loves the fair, and is endued with might,
  In such a quarrel would be proud to fight.

RHYME a a *

  There breathes not scarce a man on British ground
  (An isle for love and arms of old renown'd)
  But would have sold his life to purchase fame,
  To Palamon or Arcite sent his name:
  
RHYME a a *

And had the land selected of the best,                    
  Half had come hence, and let the world provide the rest.
  A hundred knights with Palamon there came,
  Approved in fight, and men of mighty name;
  Their arms were several, as their nations were,
  But furnish'd all alike with sword and spear.
  Some wore coat-armour, imitating scale;
  And next their skins were stubborn shirts of mail.
  Some wore a breastplate and a light jupon,
  Their horses clothed with rich caparison:
  Some for defence would leathern bucklers use,             
  Of folded hides; and others shields of pruce.
  One hung a pole-axe at his saddle-bow,
  And one a heavy mace to stun the foe;
  One for his legs and knees provided well,
  With jambeaux arm'd, and double plates of steel:
  This on his helmet wore a lady's glove,
  And that a sleeve embroider'd by his love.

RHYME a a a

    With Palamon above the rest in place,
  Lycurgus came, the surly king of Thrace;
  Black was his beard, and manly was his face;              
  
RHYME a a *

The balls of his broad eyes roll'd in his head,
  And glared betwixt a yellow and a red:
  He look'd a lion with a gloomy stare,
  And o'er his eyebrows hung his matted hair:
  Big-boned, and large of limbs, with sinews strong,
  Broad-shoulder'd, and his arms were round and long.
  Four milk-white bulls (the Thracian use of old)
  Were yoked to draw his car of burnish'd gold.
  Upright he stood, and bore aloft his shield,
  Conspicuous from afar, and overlook'd the field.          
  His surcoat was a bear-skin on his back;
  His hair hung long behind, and glossy raven black.
  His ample forehead bore a coronet,
  With sparkling diamonds and with rubies set:

RHYME a a a

  Ten brace, and more, of greyhounds, snowy fair,
  And tall as stags, ran loose, and coursed around his chair,
  A match for pards in flight, in grappling for the bear:

RHYME a a *

  With golden muzzles all their mouths were bound,
  And collars of the same their necks surround.
  Thus through the fields Lycurgus took his way;            
  His hundred knights attend in pomp and proud array.

RHYME a a *

    To match this monarch, with strong Arcite came
  Emetrius, king of Ind, a mighty name;
  On a bay courser, goodly to behold,
  The trappings of his horse adorn'd with barbarous gold.
  Not Mars bestrod a steed with greater grace;
  His surcoat o'er his arms was cloth of Thrace,
  Adorn'd with pearls, all orient, round, and great;
  His saddle was of gold, with emeralds set,
  His shoulders large a mantle did attire,                  
  With rubies thick, and sparkling as the fire:
  His amber-colour'd locks in ringlets run,
  With graceful negligence, and shone against the sun.
  His nose was aquiline, his eyes were blue;
  Ruddy his lips, and fresh and fair his hue:
  Some sprinkled freckles on his face were seen,
  Whose dusk set off the whiteness of the skill:
  His awful presence did the crowd surprise,
  Nor durst the rash spectator meet his eyes;
  Eyes that confess'd him born for kingly sway,             
  So fierce, they flash'd intolerable day.
  His age in nature's youthful prime appear'd,
  And just began to bloom his yellow beard.
  Whene'er he spoke, his voice was heard around,
  Loud as a trumpet, with a silver sound;
  A laurel wreathed his temples, fresh and green;
  And myrtle sprigs, the marks of love, were mix'd between.
  Upon his fist he bore, for his delight,
  An eagle well reclaim'd, and lily white.

RHYME a a *

    His hundred knights attend him to the war,              
  All arm'd for battle; save their heads were bare.
  Words and devices blazed on every shield,
  And pleasing was the terror of the field.

RHYME a a a

  For kings, and dukes, and barons, you might see,
  Like sparkling stars, though different in degree,
  All for the increase of arms, and love of chivalry.

RHYME a a *

  Before the king tame leopards led the way,
  And troops of lions innocently play.
  So Bacchus through the conquer'd Indies rode,
  And beasts in gambols frisk'd before their honest god.  

RHYME a a *

    In this array, the war of either side
  Through Athens pass'd with military pride.
  At prime, they enter'd on the Sunday morn;
  Rich tapestry spread the streets, and flowers the posts adorn.
  The town was all a jubilee of feasts;
  So Theseus will'd, in honour of his guests;
  Himself with open arms the kings embraced,
  Then all the rest in their degrees were graced.
  No harbinger was needful for the night,
  For every house was proud to lodge a knight.        

RHYME a a *

    I pass the royal treat, nor must relate
  The gifts bestow'd, nor how the champions sate:
  Who first, who last, or how the knights address'd
  Their vows, or who was fairest at the feast;
  Whose voice, whose graceful dance did most surprise;
  Soft amorous sighs, and silent love of eyes.
  The rivals call my Muse another way,
  To sing their vigils for the ensuing day.

RHYME a a *

    'Twas ebbing darkness, past the noon of night:
  And Phosphor, on the confines of the light,         

RHYME a a a

  Promised the sun; ere day began to spring,
  The tuneful lark already stretch'd her wing,
  And flickering on her nest, made short essays to sing.

RHYME a a a

  When wakeful Palamon, preventing day,
  Took to the royal lists his early way,
  To Venus at her fane, in her own house, to pray.

RHYME a a *

  There, falling on his knees before her shrine,
  He thus implored with prayers her power divine:

RHYME a a *

    Creator Venus, genial power of love,
  The bliss of men below, and gods above!             
  Beneath the sliding sun thou runn'st thy race,
  Dost fairest shine, and best become thy place.
  For thee the winds their eastern blasts forbear,
  Thy month reveals the spring, and opens all the year.

RHYME a a a
  
Thee, goddess! thee the storms of winter fly,
  Earth smiles with flowers renewing, laughs the sky,
  And birds to lays of love their tuneful notes apply.

RHYME a a *

  For thee the lion loathes the taste of blood,
  And, roaring, hunts his female through the wood:
  For thee the bulls rebellow through the groves,     
  And tempt the stream, and snuff their absent loves.

RHYME a a a

  'Tis thine, whate'er is pleasant, good, or fair:
  All nature is thy province, life thy care:
  Thou madest the world, and dost the world repair.

RHYME a a *

  Thou gladder of the mount of Cytheron,
  Increase of Jove, companion of the sun!
  If e'er Adonis touch'd thy tender heart,
  Have pity, goddess, for thou know'st the smart!
  Alas! I have not words to tell my grief;
  To vent my sorrow would be some relief;             
  Light sufferings give us leisure to complain;
  We groan, but cannot speak, in greater pain.
  O goddess! tell thyself what I would say,
  Thou know'st it, and I feel too much to pray.
  So grant my suit, as I enforce my might,
  In love to be thy champion, and thy knight;
  A servant to thy sex, a slave to thee,
  A foe profess'd to barren chastity.
  Nor ask I fame or honour of the field,
  Nor choose I more to vanquish than to yield:        
  In my divine Emilia make me blest;
  Let Fate, or partial Chance, dispose the rest:

RHYME a a *

  Find thou the manner, and the means prepare;
  Possession, more than conquest, is my care.
  Mars is the warrior's god; in him it lies,
  On whom he favours to confer the prize;
  With smiling aspect you serenely move
  In your fifth orb, and rule the realm of love.
  The Fates but only spin the coarser clue,
  The finest of the wool is left for you;             
  Spare me but one small portion of the twine,
  And let the sisters cut below your line:
  The rest among the rubbish may they sweep,
  Or add it to the yarn of some old miser's heap.
  But, if you this ambitious prayer deny,
  (A wish, I grant, beyond mortality,)
  Then let me sink beneath proud Arcite's arms,
  And I once dead, let him possess her charms.

RHYME a a *

    Thus ended he; then with observance due
  The sacred incense on her altar threw:              
  The curling smoke mounts heavy from the fires;
  At length it catches flame, and in a blaze expires;
  At once the gracious goddess gave the sign,
  Her statue shook, and trembled all the shrine:
  Pleased Palamon the tardy omen took:
  For, since the flames pursued the trailing smoke,
  He knew his boon was granted; but the day
  To distance driven, and joy adjourn'd with long delay.

RHYME a a *

    Now morn with rosy light had streak'd the sky,
  Up rose the sun, and up rose Emily;                 
  Address'd her early steps to Cynthia's fane,
  In state attended by her maiden train,
  Who bore the vests that holy rites require,
  Incense, and odorous gums, and cover'd fire.
  The plenteous horns with pleasant mead they crown,
  Nor wanted aught besides in honour of the Moon.
  Now while the temple smoked with hallow'd steam,
  They wash the virgin in a living stream;
  The secret ceremonies I conceal,
  Uncouth, perhaps unlawful, to reveal:               
  But such they were as Pagan use required,
  Perform'd by women when the men retired,
  Whose eyes profane their chaste mysterious rites
  Might turn to scandal, or obscene delights.
  Well-meaners think no harm; but for the rest,
  Things sacred they pervert, and silence is the best.
  Her shining hair, uncomb'd, was loosely spread,
  A crown of mastless oak adorn'd her head:
  When to the shrine approach'd, the spotless maid
  Had kindling fires on either altar laid:            

RHYME a a *

  (The rites were such as were observed of old,
  By Statius in his Theban story told.)
  Then kneeling with her hands across her breast,
  Thus lowly she preferr'd her chaste request:
  Oh, goddess, haunter of the woodland green,
  To whom both heaven and earth and seas are seen;
  Queen of the nether skies, where half the year
  Thy silver beams descend, and light the gloomy sphere!
  Goddess of maids, and conscious of our hearts,
  So keep me from the vengeance of thy darts,         
  Which Niobe's devoted issue felt,
  When hissing through the skies the feather'd deaths were dealt;
  As I desire to live a virgin life,
  Nor know the name of mother or of wife.
  Thy votress from my tender years I am,
  And love, like thee, the woods and sylvan game.

RHYME a a a

  Like death, thou know'st, I loathe the nuptial state,
  And man, the tyrant of our sex, I hate,
  A lowly servant, but a lofty mate:

RHYME a a *

  Where love is duty on the female side;              
  On theirs, mere sensual gust, and sought with surly pride.
  Now by thy triple shape, as thou art seen
  In heaven, earth, hell, and everywhere a queen,
  Grant this my first desire; let discord cease,
  And make betwixt the rivals lasting peace:
  Quench their hot fire, or far from me remove
  The flame, and turn it on some other love;
  Or, if my frowning stars have so decreed,
  That one must be rejected, one succeed,
  Make him my lord, within whose faithful breast      
  Is fix'd my image, and who loves me best.
  But, oh! even that avert! I choose it not,
  But take it as the least unhappy lot.
  A maid I am, and of thy virgin train;
  Oh, let me still that spotless name retain!
  Frequent the forests, thy chaste will obey,
  And only make the beasts of chase my prey!

RHYME a a *

    The flames ascend on either altar clear,
  While thus the blameless maid address'd her prayer.
  When, lo! the burning fire that shone so bright,    
  Flew off all sudden, with extinguish'd light,
  And left one altar dark, a little space;
  Which turn'd self-kindled, and renew'd the blaze:
  The other victor-flame a moment stood,
  Then fell, and lifeless left the extinguish'd wood;
  For ever lost, the irrevocable light
  Forsook the blackening coals, and sunk to night:

RHYME a a a

  At either end it whistled as it flew,
  And as the brands were green, so dropp'd the dew;
  Infected as it fell with sweat of sanguine hue.     

RHYME a a *

    The maid from that ill omen turn'd her eyes,
  And with loud shrieks and clamours rent the skies,
  Nor knew what signified the boding sign,
  But found the Powers displeased, and fear'd the wrath divine.

RHYME a a *

    Then shook the sacred shrine, and sudden light
  Sprung through the vaulted roof, and made the temple bright.

RHYME a a *

    The Power, behold! the Power in glory shone,
  By her bent bow, and her keen arrows known;
  The rest, a huntress issuing from the wood,
  Reclining on her cornel spear she stood.            
  Then gracious thus began: Dismiss thy fear,
  And Heaven's unchanged decrees attentive hear:
  More powerful gods have torn thee from my side,
  Unwilling to resign, and doom'd a bride:
  The two contending knights are weigh'd above;
  One Mars protects, and one the Queen of Love:
  But which the man, is in the Thunderer's breast;
  This he pronounced, 'Tis he who loves thee best.
  The fire that, once extinct, revived again,
  Foreshows the love allotted to remain:              
  Farewell! she said, and vanish'd from the place;
  The sheaf of arrows shook, and rattled in the case.
  Aghast at this, the royal virgin stood,
  Disclaim'd, and now no more a sister of the wood:

RHYME a a a

  But to the parting goddess thus she pray'd:
  Propitious still be present to my aid,
  Nor quite abandon your once favour'd maid.

RHYME a a *

  Then sighing she return'd; but smiled betwixt,
  With hopes and fears, and joys with sorrows mix'd.

RHYME a a *

    The next returning planetary hour                 
  Of Mars, who shared the heptarchy of power,
  His steps bold Arcite to the temple bent,
  To adore with Pagan rites the power armipotent:
  Then prostrate, low before his altar lay,
  And raised his manly voice, and thus began to pray:

RHYME a a *

    Strong God of arms, whose iron sceptre sways
  The freezing North, and Hyperborean seas,
  And Scythian colds, and Thracia's wintry coast,
  Where stand thy steeds, and thou art honour'd most!
  There most; but everywhere thy power is known,      
  The fortune of the fight is all thy own:
  Terror is thine, and wild amazement, flung
  From out thy chariot, withers even the strong:
  And disarray and shameful rout ensue,
  And force is added to the fainting crew.
  Acknowledged as thou art, accept my prayer,
  If aught I have achieved deserve thy care:

RHYME a a a

  If to my utmost power, with sword and shield,
  I dared the death, unknowing how to yield,
  And falling in my rank, still kept the field:       
 
RHYME a a *

 Then let my arms prevail, by thee sustain'd,
  That Emily by conquest may be gain'd.
  Have pity on my pains; nor those unknown
  To Mars, which, when a lover, were his own.
  Venus, the public care of all above,
  Thy stubborn heart has soften'd into love:
  Now, by her blandishments and powerful charms,
  When yielded she lay curling in thy arms,
  Even by thy shame, if shame it may be call'd,
  When Vulcan had thee in his net enthrall'd;         
  (Oh, envied ignominy, sweet disgrace,
  When every god that saw thee wish'd thy place!)
  By those dear pleasures, aid my arms in fight,
  And make me conquer in my patron's right:
  For I am young, a novice in the trade,
  The fool of love, unpractised to persuade:
  And want the soothing arts that catch the fair,
  But, caught myself, lie struggling in the snare:
  And she I love, or laughs at all my pain,
  Or knows her worth too well; and pays me with disdain.  
  For sure I am, unless I win in arms,
  To stand excluded from Emilia's charms:
  Nor can my strength avail, unless by thee
  Endued with force, I gain the victory!

RHYME a a *

  Then for the fire which warm'd thy generous heart,
  Pity thy subject's pains, and equal smart.
  So be the morrow's sweat and labour mine,
  The palm and honour of the conquest thine:
  Then shall the war, and stern debate, and strife
  Immortal, be the business of my life;               
  And in thy fane, the dusty spoils among,
  High on the burnish'd roof, my banner shall be hung:
  Rank'd with my champions' bucklers, and below,
  With arms reversed, the achievements of my foe:
  And while these limbs the vital spirit feeds,
  While day to night, and night to day succeeds,
  Thy smoking altar shall be fat with food
  Of incense, and the grateful steam of blood;
  Burnt-offerings morn and evening shall be thine;
  And fires eternal in thy temple shine.              
  The bush of yellow beard, this length of hair,
  Which from my birth inviolate I bear,
  Guiltless of steel, and from the razor free,
  Shall fall a plenteous crop, reserved for thee.
  So may my arms with victory be blest,
  I ask no more; let Fate dispose the rest.

RHYME a a *

    The champion ceased; there follow'd in the close
  A hollow groan: a murmuring wind arose;
  The rings of iron, that on the doors were hung,
  Sent out a jarring sound, and harshly rung:         
  The bolted gates flew open at the blast,
  The storm rush'd in, and Arcite stood aghast:
  The flames were blown aside, yet shone they bright,
  Fann'd by the wind, and gave a ruffled light.
  Then from the ground a scent began to rise,
  Sweet smelling, as accepted sacrifice:
  This omen pleased, and as the flames aspire
  With odorous incense Arcite heaps the fire:
  Nor wanted hymns to Mars, or heathen charms:
  At length the nodding statue clash'd his arms,      
  And with a sullen sound and feeble cry,
  Half sunk, and half pronounced the word of victory.
  For this, with soul devout, he thank'd the god,
  And, of success secure, return'd to his abode.

RHYME a a *

    These vows thus granted, raised a strife above,
  Betwixt the God of War and Queen of Love.
  She, granting first, had right of time to plead;
  But he had granted too, nor would recede.
  Jove was for Venus; but he fear'd his wife,
  And seem'd unwilling to decide the strife;          
  Till Saturn from his leaden throne arose,
  And found a way the difference to compose:
  Though sparing of his grace, to mischief bent,
  He seldom does a good with good intent.
  Wayward, but wise; by long experience taught,
  To please both parties, for ill ends, he sought:
  For this advantage age from youth has won,
  As not to be outridden, though outrun.
  By fortune he was now to Venus trined,
  And with stern Mars in Capricorn was join'd:        

RHYME a a *

  Of him disposing in his own abode,
  He soothed the goddess, while he gull'd the god:
  Cease, daughter, to complain, and stint the strife;
  Thy Palamon shall have his promised wife:
  And Mars, the lord of conquest, in the fight
  With palm and laurel shall adorn his knight.
  Wide is my course, nor turn I to my place,
  Till length of time, and move with tardy pace.
  Man feels me, when I press the ethereal plains,
  My hand is heavy, and the wound remains.            
  Mine is the shipwreck, in a watery sign;
  And in an earthy, the dark dungeon mine.

RHYME a a a
  
Cold shivering agues, melancholy care,
  And bitter blasting winds, and poison'd air,
  Are mine, and wilful death, resulting from despair.

RHYME a a *

  The throttling quinsey 'tis my star appoints,
  And rheumatisms ascend to rack the joints:
  When churls rebel against their native prince,
  I arm their hands, and furnish the pretence;

RHYME a a *

  And housing in the lion's hateful sign,             
  Bought senates, and deserting troops are mine.
  Mine is the privy poisoning; I command
  Unkindly seasons, and ungrateful land.
  By me kings' palaces are push'd to ground.
  And miners crush'd beneath their mines are found.
  'Twas I slew Samson, when the pillar'd hall
  Fell down, and crush'd the many with the fall.
  My looking is the sire of pestilence,
  That sweeps at once the people and the prince.
  Now weep no more, but trust thy grandsire's art,    
  Mars shall be pleased, and thou perform thy part.
  'Tis ill, though different your complexions are,
  The family of heaven for men should war.
  The expedient pleased, where neither lost his right;
  Mars had the day, and Venus had the night.
  The management they left to Chronos' care;
  Now turn we to the effect, and sing the war.

RHYME a a *

    In Athens all was pleasure, mirth, and play,
  All proper to the spring, and spritely May:
  Which every soul inspired with such delight,        
  'Twas jesting all the day, and love at night.
  Heaven smiled, and gladded was the heart of man;
  And Venus had the world as when it first began.
  At length in sleep their bodies they compose,
  And dreamt the future fight, and early rose.

RHYME a a *

    Now scarce the dawning day began to spring,
  As at a signal given, the streets with clamours ring:

RHYME a a a
  
At once the crowd arose; confused and high,
  Even from the heaven, was heard a shouting cry;
  For Mars was early up, and roused the sky.          

RHYME a a *

  The gods came downward to behold the wars,
  Sharpening their sights, and leaning from their stars.
  The neighing of the generous horse was heard,
  For battle by the busy groom prepared:
  Rustling of harness, rattling of the shield,
  Clattering of armour, furbish'd for the field.
  Crowds to the castle mounted up the street,
  Battering the pavement with their coursers' feet:

RHYME a a *

  The greedy sight might there devour the gold
  Of glittering arms, too dazzling to behold:         
  And polish'd steel, that cast the view aside,
  And crested morions, with their plumy pride.
  Knights, with a long retinue of their squires,
  In gaudy liveries march, and quaint attires.
  One laced the helm, another held the lance:
  A third the shining buckler did advance.
  The courser paw'd the ground with restless feet,
  And snorting foam'd, and champ'd the golden bit.

RHYME a a a  

The smiths and armourers on palfreys ride,
  Files in their hands, and hammers at their side,    
  And nails for loosen'd spears, and thongs for shields provide.

RHYME a a *  

The yeomen guard the streets, in seemly bands;
  And clowns come crowding on, with cudgels in their hands.

RHYME a a *

    The trumpets, next the gate, in order placed,
  Attend the sign to sound the martial blast;
  The palace-yard is fill'd with floating tides,
  And the last comers bear the former to the sides.
  The throng is in the midst: the common crew
  Shut out, the hall admits the better few;
  In knots they stand, or in a rank they walk,        
  Serious in aspect, earnest in their talk;
  Factious, and favouring this or the other side,
  As their strong fancy or weak reason guide:
  Their wagers back their wishes; numbers hold
  With the fair freckled king, and beard of gold:
  So vigorous are his eyes, such rays they cast,
  So prominent his eagle's beak is placed.
  But most their looks on the black monarch bend,
  His rising muscles, and his brawn commend;
  His double-biting axe, and beamy spear,             
  Each asking a gigantic force to rear.
  All spoke as partial favour moved the mind;
  And, safe themselves, at others' cost divined.

RHYME a a *

    Waked by the cries, the Athenian chief arose,
  The knightly forms of combat to dispose;
  And passing through the obsequious guards, he sate
  Conspicuous on a throne, sublime in state;
  There, for the two contending knights he sent;
  Arm'd cap-a-pie, with reverence low they bent;
  He smiled on both, and with superior look           
  Alike their offer'd adoration took.
  The people press on every side to see
  Their awful prince, and hear his high decree.
  Then signing to their heralds with his hand,
  They gave his orders from their lofty stand.
  Silence is thrice enjoin'd; then thus aloud
  The king-at-arms bespeaks the knights and listening crowd:

RHYME a a *

    Our sovereign lord has ponder'd in his mind
  The means to spare the blood of gentle kind;
  And of his grace, and inborn clemency,              
  He modifies his first severe decree!
  The keener edge of battle to rebate,
  The troops for honour fighting, not for hate:
  He wills, not death should terminate their strife,
  And wounds, if wounds ensue, be short of life:
  But issues, ere the fight, his dread command,
  That slings afar, and poniards hand to hand,
  Be banish'd from the field; that none shall dare
  With shorten'd sword to stab in closer war;
  But in fair combat fight with manly strength,       
  Nor push with biting point, but strike at length;

RHYME a a *

  The tourney is allow'd but one career,
  Of the tough ash, with the sharp-grinded spear;
  But knights unhorsed may rise from off the plain,
  And fight on foot their honour to regain;
  Nor, if at mischief taken, on the ground
  Be slain, but prisoners to the pillar bound,
  At either barrier placed; nor (captives made),
  Be freed, or arm'd anew the fight invade.
  The chief of either side, bereft of life,           
  Or yielded to his foe, concludes the strife.
  Thus dooms the lord: now, valiant knights and young,
  Fight each his fill with swords and maces long.

RHYME a a *

    The herald ends: the vaulted firmament
  With loud acclaims and vast applause is rent:
  Heaven guard a prince so gracious and so good,
  So just, and yet so provident of blood!
  This was the general cry. The trumpets sound,
  And warlike symphony is heard around.
  The marching troops through Athens take their way,  
  The great earl-marshal orders their array.
  The fair from high the passing pomp behold;
  A rain of flowers is from the windows roll'd.
  The casements are with golden tissue spread,
  And horses' hoofs, for earth, on silken tapestry tread.
  The king goes midmost, and the rivals ride
  In equal rank, and close his either side.

RHYME a a *

  Next after these, there rode the royal wife,
  With Emily, the cause, and the reward of strife.
  The following cavalcade, by three and three,        
  Proceed by titles marshall'd in degree.
  Thus through the southern gate they take their way,
  And at the list arrived ere prime of day.
  There, parting from the king, the chiefs divide,
  And wheeling east and west, before their many ride.
  The Athenian monarch mounts his throne on high,
  And after him the queen and Emily:
  Next these, the kindred of the crown are graced
  With nearer seats, and lords by ladies placed.
  Scarce were they seated, when with clamours loud    
  In rush'd at once a rude promiscuous crowd;
  The guards, and then each other overbear,
  And in a moment throng the spacious theatre.
  Now changed the jarring noise to whispers low,
  As winds forsaking seas more softly blow;
  When at the western gate, on which the car
  Is placed aloft, that bears the god of war,
  Proud Arcite entering arm'd before his train,
  Stops at the barrier, and divides the plain.
  Red was his banner, and display'd abroad            
  The bloody colours of his patron god.

RHYME a a *

    At that self moment enters Palamon
  The gate of Venus, and the rising Sun;
  Waved by the wanton winds, his banner flies,
  All maiden white, and shares the people's eyes.
  From east to west, look all the world around,
  Two troops so match'd were never to be found;
  Such bodies built for strength, of equal age,
  In stature sized; so proud in equipage:
  The nicest eye could no distinction make,           
  Where lay the advantage, or what side to take.

RHYME a a *

    Thus ranged, the herald for the last proclaims
  A silence, while they answer'd to their names:
  For so the king decreed, to shun the care,
  The fraud of musters false, the common bane of war.
  The tale was just, and then the gates were closed;
  And chief to chief, and troop to troop opposed.
  The heralds last retired, and loudly cried--
  The fortune of the field be fairly tried!

RHYME a a a

    At this, the challenger with fierce defy          
  His trumpet sounds; the challenged makes reply;
  With clangour rings the field, resounds the vaulted sky.

RHYME a a *

  Their vizors closed, their lances in the rest,
  Or at the helmet pointed, or the crest,
  They vanish from the barrier, speed the race,
  And spurring see decrease the middle space.
  A cloud of smoke envelops either host,
  And all at once the combatants are lost:
  Darkling they join adverse, and shock unseen,
  Coursers with coursers jostling, men with men:      
  As labouring in eclipse, a while they stay,
  Till the next blast of wind restores the day.
  They look anew: the beauteous form of fight
  Is changed, and war appears a grisly sight.
  Two troops in fair array one moment show'd,
  The next, a field with fallen bodies strow'd:
  Not half the number in their seats are found;
  But men and steeds lie grovelling on the ground.
  The points of spears are stuck within the shield,
  The steeds without their riders scour the field.    
  The knights, unhorsed, on foot renew the fight;
  The glittering falchions cast a gleaming light:
  Hauberks and helms are hew'd with many a wound,
  Out spins the streaming blood and dyes the ground.

RHYME a a *

  The mighty maces with such haste descend,
  They break the bones, and make the solid armour bend.
  This thrusts amid the throng with furious force;
  Down goes, at once, the horseman and the horse:
  That courser stumbles on the fallen steed,
  And floundering throws the rider o'er his head.     
  One rolls along, a foot-ball to his foes;
  One with a broken truncheon deals his blows.
  This halting, this disabled with his wound,
  In triumph led, is to the pillar bound,
  Where by the king's award he must abide:
  There goes a captive led on the other side.
  By fits they cease; and leaning on the lance,
  Take breath a while, and to new fight advance.

RHYME a a *

    Full oft the rivals met, and neither spared
  His utmost force, and each forgot to ward.          
  The head of this was to the saddle bent,
  The other backward to the crupper sent:
  Both were by turns unhorsed; the jealous blows
  Fall thick and heavy, when on foot they close.
  So deep their falchions bite, that every stroke
  Pierced to the quick; and equal wounds they gave and took.
  Borne far asunder by the tides of men,
  Like adamant and steel they meet again.

RHYME a a a

    So when a tiger sucks the bullock's blood,
  A famish'd lion issuing from the wood               
  Roars lordly fierce, and challenges the food:

RHYME a a *

  Each claims possession, neither will obey,
  But both their paws are fasten'd on the prey;
  They bite, they tear; and while in vain they strive,
  The swains come arm'd between, and both to distance drive.

RHYME a a *

    At length, as Fate foredoom'd, and all things tend
  By course of time to their appointed end;
  So when the sun to west was far declined,
  And both afresh in mortal battle join'd,
  The strong Emetrius came in Arcite's aid,           
  And Palamon with odds was overlaid:
  For turning short, he struck with all his might
  Full on the helmet of the unwary knight.
  Deep was the wound; he stagger'd with the blow,
  And turn'd him to his unexpected foe;
  Whom with such force he struck, he fell'd him down,
  And cleft the circle of his golden crown.
  But Arcite's men, who now prevail'd in fight,
  Twice ten at once surround the single knight:
  O'erpower'd, at length, they force him to the ground,   
  Unyielded as he was, and to the pillar bound;
  And King Lycurgus, while he fought in vain
  His friend to free, was tumbled on the plain.

RHYME a a *

    Who now laments but Palamon, compell'd
  No more to try the fortune of the field!
  And, worse than death, to view with hateful eyes
  His rival's conquest, and renounce the prize!

RHYME a a *

    The royal judge, on his tribunal placed,
  Who had beheld the fight from first to last,
  Bade cease the war; pronouncing from on high,       
  Arcite of Thebes had won the beauteous Emily.

RHYME a a a 

 The sound of trumpets to the voice replied,
  And round the royal lists the heralds cried,
  Arcite of Thebes has won the beauteous bride!

RHYME a a *

    The people rend the skies with vast applause;
  All own the chief, when Fortune owns the cause.
  Arcite is own'd even by the gods above,
  And conquering Mars insults the Queen of Love.
  So laugh'd he, when the rightful Titan fail'd,
  And Jove's usurping arms in heaven prevail'd.       
  Laugh'd all the powers who favour tyranny;
  And all the standing army of the sky.
  But Venus with dejected eyes appears,
  And, weeping on the lists, distill'd her tears;
  Her will refused, which grieves a woman most,
  And, in her champion foil'd, the cause of Love is lost.
  Till Saturn said, Fair daughter, now be still,
  The blustering fool has satisfied his will;
  His boon is given; his knight has gain'd the day,
  But lost the prize; the arrears are yet to pay;     
  Thy hour is come, and mine the care shall be
  To please thy knight, and set thy promise free.

RHYME a a *

    Now while the heralds run the lists around,
  And Arcite! Arcite! heaven and earth resound;
  A miracle (nor less it could be call'd)
  Their joy with unexpected sorrow pall'd.
  The victor knight had laid his helm aside,
  Part for his ease, the greater part for pride;
  Bare-headed, popularly low he bow'd,
  And paid the salutations of the crowd.              
  Then spurring at full speed, ran endlong on
  Where Theseus sate on his imperial throne;
  Furious he drove, and upward cast his eye,
  Where, next the queen, was placed his Emily;
  Then passing, to the saddle-bow he bent:
  A sweet regard the gracious virgin lent;
  (For women, to the brave an easy prey,
  Still follow Fortune where she leads the way):
 
RHYME a a *

 Just then, from earth sprung out a flashing fire,
  By Pluto sent, at Saturn's bad desire:              
  The startling steed was seized with sudden fright,
  And, bounding, o'er the pommel cast the knight:
  Forward he flew, and pitching on his head,
  He quiver'd with his feet, and lay for dead.
  Black was his countenance in a little space,
  For all the blood was gather'd in his face.
  Help was at hand: they rear'd him from the ground,
  And from his cumbrous arms his limbs unbound;
  Then lanced a vein, and watch'd returning breath;
  It came, but clogg'd with symptoms of his death.    
  The saddle-bow the noble parts had press'd,
  All bruised and mortified his manly breast.
  Him still entranced, and in a litter laid,
  They bore from field, and to his bed convey'd.
  At length he waked, and with a feeble cry,
  The word he first pronounced was "Emily."

RHYME a a *

    Mean time the king, though inwardly he mourn'd,
  In pomp triumphant to the town return'd,
  Attended by the chiefs, who fought the field;
  (Now friendly mix'd, and in one troop compell'd.)   
  Composed his looks to counterfeited cheer,
  And bade them not for Arcite's life to fear.
  But that which gladded all the warrior train,
  Though most were sorely wounded, none were slain.
  The surgeons soon despoil'd them of their arms,
  And some with salves they cure, and some with charms;
  Foment the bruises, and the pains assuage,
  And heal their inward hurts with sovereign draughts of sage.
  The king in person visits all around,
  Comforts the sick, congratulates the sound;         
  Honours the princely chiefs, rewards the rest,
  And holds for thrice three days a royal feast.
  None was disgraced; for falling is no shame;
  And cowardice alone is loss of fame.
  The venturous knight is from the saddle thrown;
  But 'tis the fault of Fortune, not his own,
  If crowds and palms the conquering side adorn,
  The victor under better stars was born:
  The brave man seeks not popular applause,
  Nor, overpower'd with arms, deserts his cause;      
  Unshamed, though foil'd, he does the best he can;
  Force is of brutes, but honour is of man.

RHYME a a *

    Thus Theseus smiled on all with equal grace,
  And each was set according to his place;
  With ease were reconciled the differing parts,
  For envy never dwells in noble hearts.
  At length they took their leave, the time expired,
  Well pleased, and to their several homes retired.

RHYME a a *

    Mean while the health of Arcite still impairs;
  From bad proceeds to worse, and mocks the leech's cares 
  Swoln is his breast; his inward pains increase,
  All means are used, and all without success.
  The clotted blood lies heavy on his heart,
  Corrupts, and there remains, in spite of art:
  Nor breathing veins, nor cupping will prevail;
  All outward remedies and inward fail:
  The mould of nature's fabric is destroy'd,
  Her vessels discomposed, her virtue void;

RHYME a a a

  The bellows of his lungs begin to swell:
  All out of frame is every secret cell,              
  Nor can the good receive, nor bad expel.

RHYME a a *

  Those breathing organs thus within oppress'd,
  With venom soon distend the sinews of his breast.
  Nought profits him to save abandon'd life,
  Nor vomit's upward aid, nor downward laxative.
  The midmost region batter'd and destroy'd,
  When nature cannot work, the effect of art is void.
  For physic can but mend our crazy state,
  Patch an old building, not a new create.
  Arcite is doom'd to die in all his pride,           
  Must leave his youth, and yield his beauteous bride,
  Gain'd hardly, against right, and unenjoy'd.
  When 'twas declared all hope of life was past,
  Conscience (that of all physic works the last)
  Caused him to send for Emily in haste.
  With her, at his desire, came Palamon;
  Then on his pillow raised, he thus begun:

RHYME a a *

    No language can express the smallest part
  Of what I feel, and suffer in my heart
  For you, whom best I love and value most;           
  But to your service I bequeath my ghost;
  Which from this mortal body when untied,
  Unseen, unheard, shall hover at your side;
  Nor fright you waking, nor your sleep offend,
  But wait officious, and your steps attend:
  How I have loved, excuse my faltering tongue,
  My spirit's feeble, and my pains are strong:
  This I may say, I only grieve to die,
  Because I lose my charming Emily:
  To die, when Heaven had put you in my power,        
  Fate could not choose a more malicious hour!
  What greater curse could envious Fortune give,
  Than just to die, when I began to live?

RHYME a a *

  Vain men! how vanishing a bliss we crave,
  Now warm in love, now withering in the grave!
  Never, oh never more to see the sun!
  Still dark, in a damp vault, and still alone!
  This fate is common; but I lose my breath;
  Near bliss, and yet not bless'd before my death.
  Farewell; but take me dying in your arms,           
  'Tis all I can enjoy of all your charms:
  This hand I cannot but in death resign;
  Ah! could I live! but while I live 'tis mine.
  I feel my end approach, and thus embraced,
  Am pleased to die; but hear me speak my last:
  Ah! my sweet foe, for you, and you alone,
  I broke my faith with injured Palamon.
  But love the sense of right and wrong confounds,
  Strong love and proud ambition have no bounds.
  And much I doubt, should Heaven my life prolong,    
  I should return to justify my wrong:

RHYME a a *

  For while my former flames remain within,
  Repentance is but want of power to sin.
  With mortal hatred I pursued his life,
  Nor he, nor you, were guilty of the strife;
  Nor I, but as I loved; yet all combined,
  Your beauty, and my impotence of mind;
  And his concurrent flame that blew my fire;
  For still our kindred souls had one desire.
  He had a moment's right in point of time;           
  Had I seen first, then his had been the crime.
  Fate made it mine, and justified his right;
  Nor holds this earth a more deserving knight,
  For virtue, valour, and for noble blood,
  Truth, honour, all that is comprised in good;
  So help me Heaven, in all the world is none
  So worthy to be loved as Palamon.
  He loves you too, with such an holy fire,
  As will not, cannot, but with life expire:
  Our vow'd affections both have often tried,         
  Nor any love but yours could ours divide.
  Then, by my love's inviolable band,
  By my long suffering, and my short command,
  If e'er you plight your vows when I am gone,
  Have pity on the faithful Palamon.

RHYME a a *

    This was his last; for Death came on amain,
  And exercised below his iron reign;
  Then upward to the seat of life he goes:
  Sense fled before him, what he touch'd he froze:
  Yet could he not his closing eyes withdraw,         
  Though less and less of Emily he saw;
  So, speechless, for a little space he lay;
  Then grasp'd the hand he held, and sigh'd his soul away.

RHYME a a *

    But whither went his soul, let such relate
  Who search the secrets of the future state:
  Divines can say but what themselves believe;
  Strong proofs they have, but not demonstrative:
  For, were all plain, then all sides must agree,
  And faith itself be lost in certainty.
  To live uprightly, then, is sure the best,          
  To save ourselves, and not to damn the rest.
  The soul of Arcite went where heathens go,
  Who better live than we, though less they know.

RHYME a a *

    In Palamon a manly grief appears;
  Silent, he wept, ashamed to show his tears:
  Emilia shriek'd but once, and then, oppress'd
  With sorrow, sunk upon her lover's breast:
  Till Theseus in his arms convey'd with care,
Far from so sad a sight, the swooning fair.

RHYME a a a

  'Twere loss of time her sorrow to relate;           
  Ill bears the sex a youthful lover's fate,
  When just approaching to the nuptial state.

RHYME a a *

  But like a low-hung cloud, it rains so fast,
  That all at once it falls, and cannot last.
  The face of things is changed, and Athens now,
  That laugh'd so late, becomes the scene of woe:
  Matrons and maids, both sexes, every state,
  With tears lament the knight's untimely fate.
  Nor greater grief in falling Troy was seen
  For Hector's death; but Hector was not then,        
  Old men with dust deform'd their hoary hair,
  The women beat their breasts, their cheeks they tear.
  Why wouldst thou go, with one consent they cry,
  When thou hadst gold enough, and Emily?

RHYME a a *

    Theseus himself, who should have cheer'd the grief
  Of others, wanted now the same relief;
  Old Egeus only could revive his son,
  Who various changes of the world had known,
  And strange vicissitudes of human fate,
  Still altering, never in a steady state;            
  Good after ill, and, after pain, delight,
  Alternate like the scenes of day and night:
  Since every man who lives, is born to die,
  And none can boast sincere felicity,
  With equal mind, what happens, let us bear,
  Nor joy, nor grieve too much for things beyond our care.
  Like pilgrims to the appointed place we tend;
  The world's an inn, and death the journey's end.
  Even kings but play; and when their part is done,
  Some other, worse or better, mount the throne.      
  With words like these the crowd was satisfied,
  And so they would have been, had Theseus died.

RHYME a a a
  
But he, their king, was labouring in his mind,
  A fitting place for funeral pomps to find,
  Which were in honour of the dead design'd.

RHYME a a *

  And after long debate, at last he found
  (As love itself had mark'd the spot of ground)
  That grove for ever green, that conscious laund,
  Where he with Palamon fought hand to hand:
  That where he fed his amorous desires               
  With soft complaints, and felt his hottest fires;
  There other flames might waste his earthly part,
  And burn his limbs, where love had burn'd his heart.

RHYME a a *

    This once resolved, the peasants were enjoin'd
  Sere-wood, and firs, and dodder'd oaks to find.
  With sounding axes to the grove they go,
  Fell, split, and lay the fuel on a row,
  Vulcanian food: a bier is next prepared,
  On which the lifeless body should be rear'd,
  Cover'd with cloth of gold, on which was laid       
  The corpse of Arcite, in like robes array'd.
  White gloves were on his hands, and on his head
  A wreath of laurel, mix'd with myrtle spread.
  A sword keen-edged within his right he held,
  The warlike emblem of the conquer'd field:
  Bare was his manly visage on the bier:
  Menaced his countenance; even in death severe.
  Then to the palace-hall they bore the knight,
  To lie in solemn state, a public sight.
  Groans, cries, and howlings fill the crowded place, 
  And unaffected sorrow sate on every face.
  
RHYME a a *

Sad Palamon above the rest appears,
  In sable garments, dew'd with gushing tears:
  His auburn locks on either shoulder flow'd,
  Which to the funeral of his friend he vow'd:
  But Emily, as chief, was next his side,
  A virgin-widow, and a mourning bride.
  And that the princely obsequies might be
  Perform'd according to his high degree,
 
RHYME a a a

 The steed, that bore him living to the fight,       
  Was trapp'd with polish'd steel, all shining bright,
  And cover'd with the achievements of the knight.

RHYME a a *

  The riders rode abreast, and one his shield,
  His lance of cornel-wood another held;
  The third his bow, and, glorious to behold,
  The costly quiver, all of burnish'd gold.
  The noblest of the Grecians next appear,
  And, weeping, on their shoulders bore the bier;
  With sober pace they march'd, and often stay'd,
  And through the master-street the corpse convey'd.  
  The houses to their tops with black were spread,
  And even the pavements were with mourning hid.
  The right side of the pall old Egeus kept,
  And on the left the royal Theseus wept;
  Each bore a golden bowl, of work divine,
  With honey fill'd, and milk, and mix'd with ruddy wine.
  Then Palamon, the kinsman of the slain,
  And after him appear'd the illustrious train.
  To grace the pomp, came Emily the bright,
  With cover'd fire, the funeral pile to light.       
  With high devotion was the service made,
  And all the rites of Pagan honour paid:
  So lofty was the pile, a Parthian bow,
  With vigour drawn, must send the shaft below.

RHYME a a *

  The bottom was full twenty fathom broad,
  With crackling straw beneath in due proportion strew'd.
  The fabric seem'd a wood of rising green,
  With sulphur and bitumen cast between,
  To feed the flames: the trees were unctuous fir,
  And mountain-ash, the mother of the spear;          
  The mourner-yew, and builder oak were there;
  The beech, the swimming alder, and the plane,
  Hard box, and linden of a softer grain,
  And laurels, which the gods for conquering chiefs ordain.
  How they were rank'd, shall rest untold by me,
  With nameless Nymphs that lived in every tree;
  Nor how the Dryads, or the woodland train,
  Disherited, ran howling o'er the plain:
  Nor how the birds to foreign seats repair'd,
  Or beasts, that bolted out, and saw the forest bared:   
  Nor how the ground, now clear'd, with ghastly fright
  Beheld the sudden sun, a stranger to the light.

RHYME a a *

    The straw, as first I said, was laid below;
  Of chips and sere-wood was the second row;
  The third of greens, and timber newly fell'd;
  The fourth high stage the fragrant odours held,
  And pearls, and precious stones, and rich array;
  In midst of which, embalm'd, the body lay.
  The service sung, the maid with mourning eyes
  The stubble fired; the smouldering flames arise:    
  This office done, she sunk upon the ground;
  But what she spoke, recover'd from her swound,
  I want the wit in moving words to dress;
  But by themselves the tender sex may guess.
  While the devouring fire was burning fast,
  Rich jewels in the flame the wealthy cast;

RHYME a a *

  And some their shields, and some their lances threw,
  And gave their warrior's ghost a warrior's due.

RHYME a a a
 
 Full bowls of wine, of honey, milk, and blood
  Were pour'd upon the pile of burning wood,          
  And hissing flames receive, and hungry lick the food.

RHYME a a *

  Then thrice the mounted squadrons ride around
  The fire, and Arcite's name they thrice resound:
  Hail, and farewell! they shouted thrice amain,
  Thrice facing to the left, and thrice they turn'd again:
  Still as they turn'd, they beat their clattering shields;
  The women mix their cries; and clamour fills the fields.
  The warlike wakes continued all the night,
  And funeral games were play'd at new returning light;
  Who naked wrestled best, besmear'd with oil,  
  Or who with gauntlets gave or took the foil,
  I will not tell you, nor would you attend;
  But briefly haste to my long story's end.

RHYME a a *

    I pass the rest; the year was fully mourn'd,
  And Palamon long since to Thebes returned:
  When, by the Grecians' general consent,
  At Athens Theseus held his parliament:
  Among the laws that pass'd, it was decreed,
  That conquer'd Thebes from bondage should be freed;
  Reserving homage to the Athenian throne,      
  To which the sovereign summon'd Palamon.
  Unknowing of the cause, he took his way,
  Mournful in mind, and still in black array.

RHYME a a *

    The monarch mounts the throne, and, placed on high,
  Commands into the court the beauteous Emily:
  So call'd, she came; the senate rose, and paid
  Becoming reverence to the royal maid.
  And first, soft whispers through the assembly went;
  With silent wonder then they watch'd the event:
  All hush'd, the king arose with awful grace,  
  Deep thought was in his breast, and counsel in his face.
  At length he sigh'd; and having first prepared
  The attentive audience, thus his will declared:

RHYME a a *

    The Cause and Spring of motion, from above,
  Hung down on earth the golden chain of Love:
  Great was the effect, and high was his intent,
  When peace among the jarring seeds he sent.
  Fire, flood, and earth, and air by this were bound,
  And Love, the common link, the new creation crown'd.
  The chain still holds; for though the forms decay,
  Eternal matter never wears away:
  The same First Mover certain bounds has placed,
  How long those perishable forms shall last:
  Nor can they last beyond the time assign'd
  By that all-seeing, and all-making mind:
  Shorten their hours they may; for will is free;
  But never pass the appointed destiny.
  So men oppress'd, when weary of their breath,
  Throw off the burden, and suborn their death.
  Then since those forms begin, and have their end, 
  On some unalter'd cause they sure depend:
  Parts of the whole are we; but God the whole;
  Who gives us life, and animating soul.
  For nature cannot from a part derive
  That being, which the whole can only give:
  He perfect, stable; but imperfect we,
  Subject to change, and different in degree;
  Plants, beasts, and man; and as our organs are,
  We more or less of his perfection share.

RHYME a a *

  But by a long descent, the ethereal fire      
  Corrupts; and forms, the mortal part, expire:
  As he withdraws his virtue, so they pass,
  And the same matter makes another mass:
  This law the Omniscient Power was pleased to give,
  That every kind should by succession live:
  That individuals die, His will ordains;
  The propagated species still remains.
  The monarch oak, the patriarch of the trees,
  Shoots rising up, and spreads by slow degrees;
  Three centuries he grows, and three he stays, 
  Supreme in state, and in three more decays:
  So wears the paving pebble in the street,
  And towns and towers their fatal periods meet:
  So rivers, rapid once, now naked lie,
  Forsaken of their springs; and leave their channels dry.
  So man, at first a drop, dilates with heat,
  Then, form'd, the little heart begins to beat;
  Secret he feeds, unknowing in the cell;
  At length, for hatching ripe, he breaks the shell,
  And struggles into breath, and cries for aid; 
  Then, helpless, in his mother's lap is laid:
  He creeps, he walks, and issuing into man,
  Grudges their life, from whence his own began:

RHYME a a *

  Reckless of laws, affects to rule alone,
  Anxious to reign, and restless on the throne:
  First vegetive, then feels, and reasons last;
  Rich of three souls, and lives all three to waste.
  Some thus; but thousands more in flower of age:
  For few arrive to run the latter stage.
  Sunk in the first, in battle some are slain,  
  And others whelm'd beneath the stormy main.
  What makes all this, but Jupiter the king,
  At whose command we perish, and we spring?
  Then 'tis our best, since thus ordain'd to die,
  To make a virtue of necessity.
  Take what he gives, since to rebel is vain;
  The bad grows better, which we well sustain;
  And could we choose the time, and choose aright,
  'Tis best to die, our honour at the height.
  When we have done our ancestors no shame,     
  But served our friends, and well secured our fame;
  Then should we wish our happy life to close,
  And leave no more for fortune to dispose:
  So should we make our death a glad relief
  From future shame, from sickness, and from grief:
  Enjoying while we live the present hour,
  And dying in our excellence and flower.
  Then round our death-bed every friend should run,
  And joyous of our conquest early won:

RHYME a a *

  While the malicious world with envious tears  
  Should grudge our happy end, and wish it theirs.

RHYME a a a
 
 Since then our Arcite is with honour dead,
  Why should we mourn, that he so soon is freed,
  Or call untimely, what the gods decreed?

RHYME a a *

  With grief as just, a friend may be deplored
  From a foul prison to free air restored.
  Ought he to thank his kinsman or his wife,
  Could tears recall him into wretched life?
  Their sorrow hurts themselves; on him is lost;
  And worse than both, offends his happy ghost. 
  What then remains, but, after past annoy,
  To take the good vicissitude of joy?
  To thank the gracious gods for what they give,
  Possess our souls, and while we live, to live?
  Ordain we then two sorrows to combine,
  And in one point the extremes of grief to join;
  That thence resulting joy may be renew'd,
  As jarring notes in harmony conclude.
  Then I propose that Palamon shall be
  In marriage join'd with beauteous Emily;      

RHYME a a *

  For which already I have gain'd the assent
  Of my free people in full parliament.
  Long love to her has borne the faithful knight,
  And well deserved, had fortune done him right:
  'Tis time to mend her fault; since Emily
  By Arcite's death from former vows is free:
  If you, fair sister, ratify the accord,
  And take him for your husband, and your lord,
  'Tis no dishonour to confer your grace
  On one descended from a royal race:           
  And were he less, yet years of service past,
  From grateful souls exact reward at last:
  Pity is Heaven's and yours; nor can she find
  A throne so soft as in a woman's mind.
  He said; she blush'd; and as o'er-awed by might,
  Seem'd to give Theseus what she gave the knight.
  Then turning to the Theban thus he said:
  Small arguments are needful to persuade

RHYME a a *

  Your temper to comply with my command;
  And speaking thus, he gave Emilia's hand.     

RHYME a a a

  Smiled Venus, to behold her own true knight
  Obtain the conquest, though he lost the fight;
  And bless'd with nuptial bliss the sweet laborious night.

RHYME a a *

  Eros, and Anteros, on either side,
  One fired the bridegroom, and one warm'd the bride;
  And long-attending Hymen from above,
  Shower'd on the bed the whole Idalian grove.
  All of a tenor was their after-life,
  No day discolour'd with domestic strife;
  No jealousy, but mutual truth believed,       
  Secure repose, and kindness undeceived.
  Thus Heaven, beyond the compass of his thought,
  Sent him the blessing he so dearly bought.

RHYME a a *

    So may the Queen of Love long duty bless,
  And all true lovers find the same success!

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  There lived, as authors tell, in days of yore,
  A widow somewhat old, and very poor:
  Deep in a cell her cottage lonely stood,
  Well thatch'd, and under covert of a wood.
  This dowager, on whom my tale I found,
  Since last she laid her husband in the ground,
  A simple sober life, in patience, led,
  And had but just enough to buy her bread:
  But huswifing the little Heaven had lent,
  She duly paid a groat for quarter rent;                   
  And pinch'd her belly, with her daughters two,
  To bring the year about with much ado.

RHYME a a *

    The cattle in her homestead were three sows,
  A ewe call'd Mally, and three brinded cows.
  Her parlour-window stuck with herbs around,
  Of savoury smell; and rushes strew'd the ground.
  A mapple-dresser in her hall she had,
  On which full many a slender meal she made;
  For no delicious morsel pass'd her throat;
  According to her cloth she cut her coat:                  
  No poignant sauce she knew, nor costly treat,
  Her hunger gave a relish to her meat:
  A sparing diet did her health assure;
  Or sick, a pepper posset was her cure.
  Before the day was done, her work she sped,
  And never went by candlelight to bed:
  With exercise she sweat ill humours out,
  Her dancing was not hindered by the gout.
  Her poverty was glad; her heart content;
  Nor knew she what the spleen or vapours meant.            
  Of wine she never tasted through the year,
  But white and black was all her homely cheer:
  Brown bread, and milk (but first she skimm'd her bowls),
  And rashers of singed bacon on the coals;
  On holy days, an egg or two at most;
  But her ambition never reach'd to roast.

RHYME a a *

    A yard she had with pales enclosed about,
  Some high, some low, and a dry ditch without.
  Within this homestead lived, without a peer
  For crowing loud, the noble Chanticleer;                  
  So hight her cock, whose singing did surpass
  The merry notes of organs at the mass.
  More certain was the crowing of the cock
  To number hours, than is an abbey-clock;
  And sooner than the matin-bell was rung,
  He clapp'd his wings upon his roost, and sung:
  For when degrees fifteen ascended right,
  By sure instinct he knew 'twas one at night.
  High was his comb, and coral-red withal,
  In dents embattled like a castle wall;                    
  His bill was raven-black, and shone like jet;
  Blue were his legs, and orient were his feet;
  White were his nails, like silver to behold,
  His body glittering like the burnish'd gold.
  This gentle cock, for solace of his life,
  Six misses had, besides his lawful wife.
  Scandal that spares no king, though ne'er so good,
  Says, they were all of his own flesh and blood,
  His sisters both by sire and mother's side;
  And sure their likeness show'd them near allied.          
  But make the worst, the monarch did no more,
  Than all the Ptolemys had done before:
  When incest is for interest of a nation,
  'Tis made no sin by holy dispensation.
  Some lines have been maintain'd by this alone,
  Which by their common ugliness are known.

RHYME a a *

    But passing this, as from our tale apart,
  Dame Partlet was the sovereign of his heart:
  Ardent in love, outrageous in his play,
  He feather'd her a hundred times a day:                   
  And she, that was not only passing fair,
  But was with all discreet, and debonair,
  Resolved the passive doctrine to fulfil,
  Though loth; and let him work his wicked will:

RHYME a a a

  At board and bed was affable and kind,
  According as their marriage vow did bind,
  And as the Church's precept had enjoin'd.

RHYME a a a

  Even since she was a se'ennight old, they say,
  Was chaste and humble to her dying day,
  Nor chick nor hen was known to disobey.                   

RHYME a a *

    By this her husband's heart she did obtain;
  What cannot beauty, join'd with virtue, gain!
  She was his only joy, and he her pride,
  She, when he walk'd, went pecking by his side;
  If spurning up the ground, he sprung a corn,
  The tribute in his bill to her was borne.
  But oh! what joy it was to hear him sing
  In summer, when the day began to spring,
  Stretching his neck, and warbling in his throat;
  _Solus cum sola_ then was all his note.                   
  For in the days of yore, the birds of parts
  Were bred to speak, and sing, and learn the liberal arts.

RHYME a a *

    It happ'd that, perching on the parlour-beam
  Amidst his wives, he had a deadly dream,
  Just at the dawn; and sigh'd, and groan'd so fast,
  As every breath he drew would be his last.
  Dame Partlet, ever nearest to his side,
  Heard all his piteous moan, and how he cried
  For help from gods and men: and sore aghast
  She peck'd and pull'd, and waken'd him at last.     
  Dear heart, said she, for love of heaven declare
  Your pain, and make me partner in your care!
  You groan, sir, ever since the morning-light,
  As something had disturb'd your noble sprite.

RHYME a a *

    And, madam, well I might, said Chanticleer;
  Never was shrovetide cock in such a fear.
  Even still I run all over in a sweat,
  My princely senses not recover'd yet.
  For such a dream I had, of dire portent,
  That much I fear my body will be shent:             
  It bodes I shall have wars and woful strife,
  Or in a loathsome dungeon end my life.

RHYME a a a

  Know, dame, I dreamt within my troubled breast,
  That in our yard I saw a murderous beast,
  That on my body would have made arrest.

RHYME a a *

  With waking eyes I ne'er beheld his fellow;
  His colour was betwixt a red and yellow:
  Tipp'd was his tail, and both his pricking ears
  Were black; and much unlike his other hairs:
  The rest, in shape a beagle's whelp throughout,     
  With broader forehead, and a sharper snout:
  Deep in his front were sunk his glowing eyes,
  That yet, methinks, I see him with surprise.
  Reach out your hand, I drop with clammy sweat,
  And lay it to my heart, and feel it beat.
  Now fie, for shame, quoth she; by Heaven above,
  Thou hast for ever lost thy lady's love!
  No woman can endure a recreant knight,
  He must be bold by day, and free by night:
  Our sex desires a husband or a friend,              
  Who can our honour and his own defend.
  Wise, hardy, secret, liberal of his purse:
  A fool is nauseous, but a coward worse:
  No bragging coxcomb, yet no baffled knight.
  How darest thou talk of love, and darest not fight?
  How darest thou tell thy dame thou art affear'd?
  Hast thou no manly heart, and hast a beard?

RHYME a a *

    If aught from fearful dreams may be divined,
  They signify a cock of dunghill kind.
  All dreams, as in old Galen I have read,            
  Are from repletion and complexion bred;
  From rising fumes of indigested food,
  And noxious humours that infect the blood:
  And sure, my lord, if I can read aright,
  These foolish fancies you have had to-night
  Are certain symptoms (in the canting style)
  Of boiling choler, and abounding bile;
  This yellow gall, that in your stomach floats,
  Engenders all these visionary thoughts.
  When choler overflows, then dreams are bred         
  Of flames, and all the family of red;
  Red dragons, and red beasts, in sleep we view,
  For humours are distinguish'd by their hue.
  From hence we dream of wars and warlike things,
  And wasps and hornets with their double wings.

RHYME a a *

  Choler adust congeals our blood with fear,
  Then black bulls toss us, and black devils tear.
  In sanguine airy dreams, aloft we bound;
  With rheums oppress'd, we sink in rivers drown'd.
  More I could say, but thus conclude my theme,       
  The dominating humour makes the dream.
  Cato was in his time accounted wise,
  And he condemns them all for empty lies.

RHYME a a a

  Take my advice, and when we fly to ground,
  With laxatives preserve your body sound,
  And purge the peccant humours that abound.

RHYME a a *

  I should be loath to lay you on a bier;
  And though there lives no pothecary near,
  I dare for once prescribe for your disease,
  And save long bills, and a damn'd doctor's fees.    
  Two sovereign herbs, which I by practice know,
  And both at hand (for in our yard they grow),
  On peril of my soul shall rid you wholly
  Of yellow choler, and of melancholy:
  You must both purge, and vomit; but obey,
  And for the love of heaven make no delay.

RHYME a a *

  Since hot and dry in your complexion join,
  Beware the sun when in a vernal sign;
  For when he mounts exalted in the Ram,
  If then he finds your body in a flame,              
  Replete with choler, I dare lay a groat,
  A tertian ague is at least your lot.
  Perhaps a fever (which the gods forefend!)
  May bring your youth to some untimely end:
  And therefore, sir, as you desire to live,
  A day or two before your laxative,
  Take just three worms, nor under nor above,
  Because the gods unequal numbers love,
  These digestives prepare you for your purge;
  Of fumetory, centaury, and spurge,                  
  And of ground ivy add a leaf or two,--
  All which within our yard or garden grow.
  Eat these, and be, my lord, of better cheer;
  Your father's son was never born to fear.

RHYME a a *

    Madam, quoth he, gramercy for your care,
  But Cato, whom you quoted, you may spare:
  'Tis true, a wise and worthy man he seems,
  And (as you say) gave no belief to dreams:
  But other men of more authority,
  And, by the immortal powers! as wise as he,         
  Maintain, with sounder sense, that dreams forebode;
  For Homer plainly says they come from God.
  Nor Cato said it: but some modern fool
  Imposed in Cato's name on boys at school.
  Believe me, madam, morning dreams foreshow
  The events of things, and future weal or woe:
  Some truths are not by reason to be tried,
  But we have sure experience for our guide.
  An ancient author, equal with the best,
  Relates this tale of dreams among the rest.         

RHYME a a *

    Two friends or brothers, with devout intent,
  On some far pilgrimage together went.
  It happen'd so that, when the sun was down,
  They just arrived by twilight at a town;
  That day had been the baiting of a bull,
  'Twas at a feast, and every inn so full,
  That no void room in chamber, or on ground,
  And but one sorry bed was to be found:
  And that so little it would hold but one,
  Though till this hour they never lay alone.         
  So were they forced to part; one staid behind,
  His fellow sought what lodging he could find:
  At last he found a stall where oxen stood,
  And that he rather chose than lie abroad.
  'Twas in a farther yard without a door;
  But, for his ease, well litter'd was the floor.
  His fellow, who the narrow bed had kept,
  Was weary, and without a rocker slept:

RHYME a a *

  Supine he snored; but in the dead of night
  He dream'd his friend appear'd before his sight,    
  Who, with a ghastly look and doleful cry,
  Said, Help me, brother, or this night I die:
  Arise, and help, before all help be vain,
  Or in an ox's stall I shall be slain.
  Roused from his rest, he waken'd in a start,
  Shivering with horror, and with aching heart;

RHYME a a a

  At length to cure himself by reason tries;
  'Tis but a dream, and what are dreams but lies?
  So thinking, changed his side, and closed his eyes.

RHYME a a a

  His dream returns; his friend appears again:        
  The murderers come, now help, or I am slain:
  'Twas but a vision still, and visions are but vain.

RHYME a a *

  He dream'd the third: but now his friend appear'd
  Pale, naked, pierced with wounds, with blood besmear'd:
  Thrice warn'd, awake, said he; relief is late,
  The deed is done; but thou revenge my fate:

RHYME a a *

  Tardy of aid, unseal thy heavy eyes;
  Awake, and with the dawning day arise:
  Take to the western gate thy ready way,
  For by that passage they my corpse convey:          
  My corpse is in a tumbril laid, among
  The filth and ordure, and enclosed with dung;
  That cart arrest, and raise a common cry;
  For sacred hunger of my gold, I die:
  Then show'd his grisly wound; and last he drew
  A piteous sigh, and took a long adieu.

RHYME a a *

    The frighted friend arose by break of day,
  And found the stall where late his fellow lay.
  Then of his impious host inquiring more,
  Was answer'd that his guest was gone before:        
  Muttering he went, said he, by morning light,
  And much complain'd of his ill rest by night.

RHYME a a a

  This raised suspicion in the pilgrim's mind;
  Because all hosts are of an evil kind,
  And oft to share the spoils with robbers join'd.

RHYME a a *

    His dream confirm'd his thought: with troubled look
  Straight to the western gate his way he took:
  There, as his dream foretold, a cart he found,
  That carried compost forth to dung the ground.
  This when the pilgrim saw, he stretch'd his throat, 
  And cried out murder with a yelling note.
  My murder'd fellow in this cart lies dead,
  Vengeance and justice on the villain's head;
  You, magistrates, who sacred laws dispense,
  On you I call to punish this offence.

RHYME a a *

    The word thus given, within a little space
  The mob came roaring out, and throng'd the place.

RHYME a a a

  All in a trice they cast the cart to ground,
  And in the dung the murder'd body found;
  Though breathless, warm, and reeking from the wound.

RHYME a a *

  Good Heaven, whose darling attribute we find
  Is boundless grace and mercy to mankind,            
  Abhors the cruel; and the deeds of night
  By wondrous ways reveals in open light:
  Murder may pass unpunish'd for a time,
  But tardy justice will o'ertake the crime.

RHYME a a *

  And oft a speedier pain the guilty feels;
  The hue and cry of Heaven pursues him at the heels,

RHYME a a a

  Fresh from the fact; as in the present case,
  The criminals are seized upon the place:            
  Carter and host confronted face to face.

RHYME a a *

  Stiff in denial, as the law appoints,
  On engines they distend their tortured joints:
  So was confession forced, the offence was known,
  And public justice on the offenders done.

RHYME a a b b c c c

    Here may you see that visions are to dread;
  And in the page that follows this, I read
  Of two young merchants, whom the hope of gain
  Induced in partnership to cross the main:
  Waiting till willing winds their sails supplied,    
  Within a trading town they long abide,
  Full fairly situate on a haven's side.

RHYME a a *

    One evening it befell, that, looking out,
  The wind they long had wish'd was come about:
  Well pleased, they went to rest; and if the gale
  Till morn continued, both resolved to sail.
  But as together in a bed they lay,
  The younger had a dream at break of day.
  A man he thought stood frowning at his side:
  Who warn'd him for his safety to provide,           
  Nor put to sea, but safe on shore abide.
  I come, thy Genius, to command thy stay;
  Trust not the winds, for fatal is the day,
  And death unhoped attends the watery way.
  The vision said; and vanish'd from his sight:
  The dreamer waken'd in a mortal fright:

RHYME a a *

  Then pull'd his drowsy neighbour, and declared
  What in his slumber he had seen and heard.
  His friend smiled scornful, and with proud contempt
  Rejects as idle what his fellow dreamt.             
  Stay, who will stay: for me no fears restrain,
  Who follow Mercury, the god of gain;
  Let each man do as to his fancy seems,
  I wait, not I, till you have better dreams.

RHYME a a *

  Dreams are but interludes which fancy makes;
  When monarch Reason sleeps, this mimic wakes:
  Compounds a medley of disjointed things,
  A mob of cobblers, and a court of kings:
  Light fumes are merry, grosser fumes are sad:
  Both are the reasonable soul run mad:               
  And many monstrous forms in sleep we see,
  That neither were, nor are, nor e'er can be.
  Sometimes forgotten things, long cast behind,
  Rush forward in the brain, and come to mind.
  The nurse's legends are for truths received,
  And the man dreams but what the boy believed.

RHYME a a a b b c c 

    Sometimes we but rehearse a former play,
  The night restores our actions done by day;
  As hounds in sleep will open for their prey.
  In short, the farce of dreams is of a piece:        
  Chimeras all; and more absurd, or less:
  You, who believe in tales, abide alone;
  Whate'er I get this voyage is my own.

RHYME a a *

    Thus while he spoke, he heard the shouting crew
  That call'd aboard, and took his last adieu.
  The vessel went before a merry gale,
  And for quick passage put on every sail:
  But when least fear'd, and even in open day,
  The mischief overtook her in the way:
  Whether she sprung a leak, I cannot find,           
  Or whether she was overset with wind,
  Or that some rock below her bottom rent;
  But down at once with all her crew she went:
  Her fellow ships from far her loss descried;
  But only she was sunk, and all were safe beside.

RHYME a a *

    By this example you are taught again,
  That dreams and visions are not always vain:
  But if, dear Partlet, you are still in doubt,
  Another tale shall make the former out.

RHYME a a *

    Kenelm, the son of Kenulph, Mercia's king,        
  Whose holy life the legends loudly sing,
  Warn'd in a dream, his murder did foretell
  From point to point as after it befell:
  All circumstances to his nurse he told,
  (A wonder from a child of seven years old):

RHYME a a *

  The dream with horror heard, the good old wife
  From treason counsell'd him to guard his life;
  But close to keep the secret in his mind,
  For a boy's vision small belief would find.
  The pious child, by promise bound, obey'd,          
  Nor was the fatal murder long delay'd:
  By Quenda slain, he fell before his time,
  Made a young martyr by his sister's crime.
  The tale is told by venerable Bede,
  Which, at your better leisure, you may read.

RHYME a a *

    Macrobius, too, relates the vision sent
  To the great Scipio, with the famed event:
  Objections makes, but after makes replies,
  And adds, that dreams are often prophecies.

RHYME a a a b b c c d d 

    Of Daniel you may read in holy writ,              
  Who, when the king his vision did forget,
  Could word for word the wondrous dream repeat.
  Nor less of patriarch Joseph understand,
  Who by a dream enslaved the Egyptian land,
  The years of plenty and of dearth foretold,
  When, for their bread, their liberty they sold.
  Nor must the exalted butler be forgot,
  Nor he whose dream presaged his hanging lot.

RHYME a a b b c c c 

    And did not Croesus the same death foresee,
  Raised in his vision on a lofty tree?               
  The wife of Hector, in his utmost pride,
  Dream'd of his death the night before he died;
  Well was he warn'd from battle to refrain,
  But men to death decreed are warn'd in vain:
  He dared the dream, and by his fatal foe was slain.

RHYME a a *

    Much more I know, which I forbear to speak,
  For, see, the ruddy day begins to break;
  Let this suffice, that plainly I foresee
  My dream was bad, and bodes adversity:
  But neither pills nor laxatives I like,             
  They only serve to make the well-man sick:
  Of these his gain the sharp physician makes,
  And often gives a purge, but seldom takes:
  They not correct, but poison all the blood,
  And ne'er did any but the doctors good.
  Their tribe, trade, trinkets, I defy them all;
  With every work of pothecary's hall.
  These melancholy matters I forbear:
  But let me tell thee, Partlet mine, and swear,
  That when I view the beauties of thy face,          
  I fear not death, nor dangers, nor disgrace:

RHYME a a b b b 

  So may my soul have bliss, as when I spy
  The scarlet red about thy partridge eye,
  While thou art constant to thy own true knight,
  While thou art mine, and I am thy delight,
  All sorrows at thy presence take their flight.

RHYME a a *

  For true it is, as _in principio,
  Mulier est hominis confusio_.
  Madam, the meaning of this Latin is,
  That woman is to man his sovereign bliss.           
  For when by night I feel your tender side,
  Though for the narrow perch I cannot ride,

RHYME a a *

  Yet I have such a solace in my mind,
  That all my boding cares are cast behind;
  And even already I forget my dream.
  He said, and downward flew from off the beam;
  For daylight now began apace to spring,
  The thrush to whistle, and the lark to sing;
  Then, crowing, clapp'd his wings, the appointed call,
  To chuck his wives together in the hall.            

RHYME a a *

    By this the widow had unbarr'd the door,
  And Chanticleer went strutting out before.
  With royal courage, and with heart so light,
  As show'd he scorned the visions of the night.
  Now roaming in the yard, he spurn'd the ground,
  And gave to Partlet the first grain he found;

RHYME a a *

  Then often feather'd her with wanton play,
  And trod her twenty times ere prime of day;
  And took by turns, and gave, so much delight,
  Her sisters pined with envy at the sight.           
  He chuck'd again, when other corns he found,
  And scarcely deign'd to set a foot to ground;
  But swagger'd like a lord about his hall,
  And his seven wives came running at his call.

RHYME a a *

    'Twas now the month in which the world began,
  (If March beheld the first created man):
  And since the vernal equinox, the sun,
  In Aries twelve degrees, or more, had run;
  When, casting up his eyes against the light,
  Both month, and day, and hour he measured right;    
  And told more truly than the Ephemeris:
  For art may err, but nature cannot miss.
  Thus numbering times and seasons in his breast,
  His second crowing the third hour confess'd.
  Then turning, said to Partlet, See, my dear,
  How lavish nature has adorn'd the year;

RHYME a a *

  How the pale primrose and blue violet spring,
  And birds essay their throats disused to sing:
  All these are ours; and I with pleasure see
  Man strutting on two legs, and aping me:            
  An unfledged creature, of a lumpish frame,
  Endow'd with fewer particles of flame;
  Our dame sits cowering o'er a kitchen fire,
  I draw fresh air, and nature's works admire:
  And even this day in more delight abound,
  Than, since I was an egg, I ever found.

RHYME a a b b b c c 

    The time shall come when Chanticleer shall wish
  His words unsaid, and hate his boasted bliss:
  The crested bird shall by experience know,
  Jove made not him his masterpiece below;            
  And learn the latter end of joy is woe.
  The vessel of his bliss to dregs is run,
  And Heaven will have him taste his other tun.

RHYME a a *

    Ye wise, draw near, and hearken to my tale,
  Which proves that oft the proud by flattery fall:
  The legend is as true, I undertake,
  As Tristran is, and Launcelot of the lake:
  Which all our ladies in such reverence hold,
  As if in Book of Martyrs it were told.

RHYME a a b b c c c d d e e 

    A fox, full-fraught with seeming sanctity,        
  That fear'd an oath, but, like the devil, would lie;
  Who look'd like Lent, and had the holy leer,
  And durst not sin before he said his prayer;
  This pious cheat, that never suck'd the blood,
  Nor chew'd the flesh of lambs, but when he could,
  Had pass'd three summers in the neighbouring wood:
  And musing long, whom next to circumvent,
  On Chanticleer his wicked fancy bent;
  And in his high imagination cast,
  By stratagem, to gratify his taste.                 

RHYME a a *

      The plot contrived, before the break of day
  Saint Reynard through the hedge had made his way;
  The pale was next, but proudly with a bound
  He leapt the fence of the forbidden ground:
  Yet fearing to be seen, within a bed
  Of coleworts he conceal'd his wily head;
  Then skulk'd till afternoon, and watch'd his time
  (As murderers use) to perpetrate his crime.

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e f f 

    Oh, hypocrite, ingenious to destroy!
  Oh, traitor, worse than Sinon was to Troy!          
  Oh, vile subverter of the Gallic reign,
  More false than Gano was to Charlemagne!
  Oh, Chanticleer, in an unhappy hour
  Didst thou forsake the safety of thy bower!
  Better for thee thou hadst believed thy dream,
  And not that day descended from the beam.
  But here the doctors eagerly dispute:
  Some hold predestination absolute;
  Some clerks maintain, that Heaven at first foresees,
  And in the virtue of foresight decrees.             

RHYME a a *

  If this be so, then prescience binds the will,
  And mortals are not free to good or ill;
  For what he first foresaw, he must ordain,
  Or its eternal prescience may be vain:
  As bad for us as prescience had not been:
  For first, or last, he's author of the sin.
  And who says that, let the blaspheming man
  Say worse even of the devil, if he can.
  For how can that Eternal Power be just
  To punish man, who sins because he must?            
  Or, how can he reward a virtuous deed,
  Which is not done by us; but first decreed?

RHYME a a b b c c d d 

    I cannot bolt this matter to the bran,
  As Bradwardin and holy Austin can;
  If prescience can determine actions so
  That we must do, because he did foreknow,
  Or that, foreknowing, yet our choice is free,
  Not forced to sin by strict necessity;
  This strict necessity they simple call,
  Another sort there is conditional.                  

RHYME a a b b b c c d d e e 

  The first so binds the will, that things foreknown
  By spontaneity, not choice, are done.
  Thus galley-slaves tug willing at their oar,
  Content to work, in prospect of the shore;
  But would not work at all if not constrain'd before.
  That other does not liberty constrain,
  But man may either act, or may refrain.
  Heaven made us agents free to good or ill,
  And forced it not, though he foresaw the will.
  Freedom was first bestow'd on human race,           
  And prescience only held the second place.

RHYME a a b b c c c d d e e f f 

    If he could make such agents wholly free,
  I not dispute, the point's too high for me;
  For Heaven's unfathom'd power what man can sound,
  Or put to his Omnipotence a bound?
  He made us to his image, all agree;
  That image is the soul, and that must be,
  Or not, the Maker's image, or be free.
  But whether it were better man had been
  By nature bound to good, not free to sin,           
  I waive, for fear of splitting on a rock,
  The tale I tell is only of a cock;
  Who had not run the hazard of his life,
  Had he believed his dream, and not his wife:

RHYME a a *

  For women, with a mischief to their kind,
  Pervert with bad advice our better mind.
  A woman's counsel brought us first to woe,
  And made her man his paradise forego,
  Where at heart's ease he lived; and might have been
  As free from sorrow as he was from sin.             
  For what the devil had their sex to do,
  That, born to folly, they presumed to know,
  And could not see the serpent in the grass?
  But I myself presume, and let it pass.

RHYME a a *

    Silence in times of suffering is the best,
  'Tis dangerous to disturb an hornet's nest.
  In other authors you may find enough,
  But all they say of dames is idle stuff:            
  Legends of lying wits together bound,
  The Wife of Bath would throw them to the ground;
  These are the words of Chanticleer, not mine;
  I honour dames, and think their sex divine.

RHYME a a b b c c c 

    Now to continue what my tale begun:
  Lay Madam Partlet basking in the sun,
  Breast-high in sand: her sisters in a row
  Enjoy'd the beams above, the warmth below;
  The cock, that of his flesh was ever free,
  Sung merrier than the mermaid in the sea:
  And so befell, that as he cast his eye

RHYME a b b c c d d e e f f 

  Among the coleworts on a butterfly,                 
  He saw false Reynard where he lay full low:
  I need not swear he had no list to crow:
  But cried _cock, cock_, and gave a sudden start,
  As sore dismay'd, and frighted at his heart:
  For birds and beasts, inform'd by nature, know
  Kinds opposite to theirs, and fly their foe;
  So Chanticleer, who never saw a fox,
  Yet shunn'd him as a sailor shuns the rocks.
  But the false loon, who could not work his will
  But open force, employ'd his flattering skill;      

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e 

  I hope, my lord, said he, I not offend;
  Are you afraid of me, that am your friend?
  I were a beast indeed to do you wrong,
  I, who have loved and honour'd you so long:
  Stay, gentle sir, nor take a false alarm,
  For, on my soul, I never meant you harm.
  I come no spy, nor as a traitor press,
  To learn the secrets of your soft recess:
  Far be from Reynard so profane a thought,
  But by the sweetness of your voice was brought:     

RHYME a a b b c c c 

  For, as I bid my beads, by chance I heard
  The song as of an angel in the yard;
  A song that would have charm'd the infernal gods,
  And banish'd horror from the dark abodes:
  Had Orpheus sung it in the nether sphere,
  So much the hymn had pleased the tyrant's ear,
  The wife had been detain'd, to keep the husband there.

RHYME a a b b c c 

    My lord, your sire familiarly I knew,
  A peer deserving such a son as you:
  He, with your lady-mother (whom Heaven rest!)       
  Has often graced my house, and been my guest;
  To view his living features does me good,
  For I am your poor neighbour in the wood;

RHYME a a b b c c d d d 

  And in my cottage should be proud to see
  The worthy heir of my friend's family.
  But since I speak of singing, let me say,
  As with an upright heart I safely may,
  That, save yourself, there breathes not on the ground
  One like your father for a silver sound.
  So sweetly would he wake the winter day,            
  That matrons to the church mistook their way,
  And thought they heard the merry organ play.

RHYME a a *

  And he, to raise his voice, with artful care,
  (What will not beaux attempt to please the fair?)
  On tiptoe stood to sing with greater strength,
  And stretch'd his comely neck at all the length:
  And while he strain'd his voice to pierce the skies,
  As saints in raptures use, would shut his eyes,

RHYME a a *

  That the sound striving through the narrow throat,
  His winking might avail to mend the note,           
  By this, in song, he never had his peer,
  From sweet Cecilia down to Chanticleer;
  Nor Maro's muse, who sung the mighty Man,
  Nor Pindar's heavenly lyre, nor Horace when a swan.
  Your ancestors proceed from race divine:
  From Brennus and Belinus is your line;
  Who gave to sovereign Rome such loud alarms,
  That even the priests were not excused from arms.

RHYME a a *

    Besides, a famous monk of modern times
  Has left of cocks recorded in his rhymes,           
  That of a parish priest the son and heir
  (When sons of priests were from the proverb clear),
  Affronted once a cock of noble kind,
  And either lamed his legs, or struck him blind;
  For which the clerk his father was disgraced,
  And in his benefice another placed.
  Now sing, my lord, if not for love of me,
  Yet for the sake of sweet Saint Charity;
  Make hills and dales, and earth and heaven rejoice,
  And emulate your father's angel-voice.              

RHYME a a *

    The cock was pleased to hear him speak so fair,
  And proud beside, as solar people are;
  Nor could the treason from the truth descry,
  So was he ravish'd with this flattery;
  So much the more, as from a little elf
  He had a high opinion of himself;
  Though sickly, slender, and not large of limb,
  Concluding all the world was made for him.

RHYME a a *

    Ye princes, raised by poets to the gods,
  And Alexander'd[g b ] up in lying odes!               
  Believe not every flattering knave's report,
  There's many a Reynard lurking in the court;
  And he shall be received with more regard,
  And listen'd to, than modest truth is heard.

RHYME a a *

    This Chanticleer, of whom the story sings,
  Stood high upon his toes, and clapp'd his wings;
  Then stretch'd his neck, and wink d with both his eyes,
  Ambitious as he sought the Olympic prize.
  But while he pain'd himself to raise his note,
  False Renyard rush'd and caught him by the throat.  
  Then on his back he laid the precious load,
  And sought his wonted shelter of the wood;
  Swiftly he made his way the mischief done,
  Of all unheeded, and pursued by none.

RHYME a a *

    Alas, what stay is there in human state!
  Or who can shun inevitable fate?
  The doom was written, the decree was pass'd,
  Ere the foundations of the world were cast!
  In Aries though the sun exalted stood,
  His patron-planet, to procure his good;             
  Yet Saturn was his mortal foe, and he,
  In Libra raised, opposed the same degree:
  The rays both good and bad, of equal power,
  Each thwarting other, made a mingled hour.

RHYME a a *

    On Friday morn he dreamt this direful dream,
  Cross to the worthy native, in his scheme!
  Ah, blissful Venus, Goddess of delight!
  How couldst thou suffer thy devoted knight
  On thy own day to fall by foe oppress'd,
  The wight of all the world who served thee best?    

RHYME a a *

  Who, true to love, was all for recreation,
  And minded not the work of propagation.
  Ganfride,[g c ] who couldst so well in rhyme complain
  The death of Richard with an arrow slain,
  Why had not I thy muse, or thou my heart,
  To sing this heavy dirge with equal art?
  That I, like thee, on Friday might complain;
  For on that day was Coeur de Lion slain.

RHYME a a b b b c c d d e e 

    Not louder cries, when Ilium was in flames,
  Were sent to Heaven by woful Trojan dames,          
  When Pyrrhus toss'd on high his burnish'd blade,
  And offer'd Priam to his father's shade,
  Than for the cock the widow'd poultry made.
  Fair Partlet first, when he was borne from sight,
  With sovereign shrieks bewail'd her captive knight:
  Far louder than the Carthaginian wife,
  When Asdrubal, her husband, lost his life;
  When she beheld the smouldering flames ascend,
  And all the Punic glories at an end:

RHYME a a *

  Willing into the fires she plunged her head,        
  With greater ease than others seek their bed.
  Not more aghast the matrons of renown,
  When tyrant Nero burn'd the imperial town,
  Shriek'd for the downfall in a doleful cry,
  For which their guiltless lords were doom'd to die.

RHYME a a *

    Now to my story I return again:
  The trembling widow, and her daughters twain,
  This woful cackling cry with horror heard,
  Of those distracted damsels in the yard;
  And starting up beheld the heavy sight,             
  How Reynard to the forest took his flight,
  And 'cross his back, as in triumphant scorn,
  The hope and pillar of the house was borne.

RHYME a a *

    The fox! the wicked fox! was all the cry;
  Out from his house ran every neighbour nigh:
  The vicar first, and after him the crew,
  With forks and staves the felon to pursue.
  Ran Coll our dog, and Talbot with the band,
  And Malkin, with her distaff in her hand:
  Ran cow and calf, and family of hogs,               
  In panic horror of pursuing dogs;
  With many a deadly grunt and doleful squeak,
  Poor swine, as if their pretty hearts would break.

RHYME a a *

  The shouts of men, the women in dismay,
  With shrieks augment the terror of the day.
  The ducks that heard the proclamation cried,
  And fear'd a persecution might betide,
  Full twenty miles from town their voyage take,
  Obscure in rushes of the liquid lake.
  The geese fly o'er the barn; the bees in arms       
  Drive headlong from their waxen cells in swarms.
  Jack Straw at London-stone, with all his rout,
  Struck not the city with so loud a shout;

RHYME a a b b b c c d d 

  Not when, with English hate, they did pursue
  A Frenchman, or an unbelieving Jew:
  Not when the welkin rung with 'one and all;'
  And echoes bounded back from Fox's hall:
  Earth seem'd to sink beneath, and heaven above to fall.
  With might and main they chased the murderous fox,
  With brazen trumpets, and inflated box,             
  To kindle Mars with military sounds,
  Nor wanted horns to inspire sagacious hounds.

RHYME a a *

    But see how Fortune can confound the wise,
  And when they least expect it, turn the dice!
  The captive-cock, who scarce could draw his breath,
  And lay within the very jaws of death;
  Yet in this agony his fancy wrought,
  And fear supplied him with this happy thought:

RHYME a a b b c c c d d 

    Yours is the prize, victorious prince! said he,
  The vicar my defeat, and all the village see.       
  Enjoy your friendly fortune while you may,
  And bid the churls that envy you the prey
  Call back their mongrel curs, and cease their cry,
  See, fools, the shelter of the wood is nigh,
  And Chanticleer in your despite shall die,
  He shall be pluck'd and eaten to the bone.
    'Tis well advised, in faith it shall be done;

RHYME a a *

  This Reynard said: but as the word he spoke,
  The prisoner with a spring from prison broke;
  Then stretch'd his feather'd fans with all his might,   
  And to the neighbouring maple wing'd his flight;
  Whom, when the traitor safe on tree beheld,
  He cursed the gods, with shame and sorrow fill'd:
  Shame for his folly, sorrow out of time,
  For plotting an unprofitable crime;
  Yet mastering both, the artificer of lies
  Renews the assault, and his last battery tries.

RHYME a a *

    Though I, said he, did ne'er in thought offend,
  How justly may my lord suspect his friend?
  The appearance is against me, I confess,            
  Who seemingly have put you in distress:
  You, if your goodness does not plead my cause,
  May think I broke all hospitable laws,
  To bear you from your palace-yard by might,
  And put your noble person in a fright:

RHYME a a b b c c c d d 

  This, since you take it ill, I must repent,
  Though, Heaven can witness, with no bad intent:
  I practised it, to make you taste your cheer
  With double pleasure, first prepared by fear.
  So loyal subjects often seize their prince,         
  Forced (for his good) to seeming violence,
  Yet mean his sacred person not the least offence.
  Descend; so help me Jove, as you shall find,
  That Reynard comes of no dissembling kind.

RHYME a a b b c c c d d 

    Nay, quoth the Cock, but I beshrew us both,
  If I believe a saint upon his oath:
  An honest man may take a knave's advice,
  But idiots only may be cozen'd twice:
  Once warn'd is well bewared; no nattering lies
  Shall soothe me more to sing with winking eyes,     
  And open mouth, for fear of catching flies.
  Who blindfold walks upon a river's brim,
  When he should see, has he deserved to swim?

RHYME a a b b c c 

    Better, Sir Cock, let all contention cease,
  Come down, said Reynard, let us treat of peace.
  A peace with all my soul, said Chanticleer;
  But, with your favour, I will treat it here:
  And, lest the truce with treason should be mix'd,
  'Tis my concern to have the tree betwixt.

RHYME a a b b c c d d d e e e 

    In this plain fable you the effect may see        
  Of negligence, and fond credulity:
  And learn besides of flatterers to beware,
  Then most pernicious when they speak too fair.
  The cock and fox, the fool and knave imply;
  The truth is moral, though the tale a lie.
  Who spoke in parables, I dare not say;
  But sure he knew it was a pleasing way,
  Sound sense, by plain example, to convey.
  And in a heathen author we may find,
  That pleasure with instruction should be join'd;    
  So take the corn, and leave the chaff behind.

RHYME a a b b c c d d d 

  Now turning from the wintry signs, the sun,
  His course exalted, through the Ram had run,
  And whirling up the skies, his chariot drove
  Through Taurus, and the lightsome realms of love;
  Where Venus from her orb descends in showers,
  To glad the ground, and paint the fields with flowers:
  When first the tender blades of grass appear,
  And buds, that yet the blast of Eurus fear,
  Stand at the door of life, and doubt to clothe the year:

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  Till gentle heat, and soft repeated rains,                
  Make the green blood to dance within their veins:
  Then, at their call, embolden'd out they come,
  And swell the gems, and burst the narrow room;
  Broader and broader yet, their blooms display,
  Salute the welcome sun, and entertain the day.
  Then from their breathing souls the sweets repair
  To scent the skies, and purge the unwholesome air:
  Joy spreads the heart, and, with a general song,
  Spring issues out, and leads the jolly months along.

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e f f f 

    In that sweet season, as in bed I lay,                  
  And sought in sleep to pass the night away,
  I turn'd my weary side, but still in vain,
  Though full of youthful health, and void of pain:
  Cares I had none, to keep me from my rest,
  For love had never enter'd in my breast;
  I wanted nothing fortune could supply,
  Nor did she slumber till that hour deny.
  I wonder'd then, but after found it true,
  Much joy had dried away the balmy dew:
  Seas would be pools, without the brushing air             
  To curl the waves; and sure some little care
  Should weary nature so, to make her want repair.

RHYME a a b b b c c d d e e f f 

    When Chanticleer the second watch had sung,
  Scorning the scorner sleep, from bed I sprung;
  And dressing, by the moon, in loose array,
  Pass'd out in open air, preventing day,
  And sought a goodly grove, as fancy led my way.
  Straight as a line in beauteous order stood
  Of oaks unshorn a venerable wood;
  Fresh was the grass beneath, and every tree,              
  At distance planted in a due degree,
  Their branching arms in air with equal space
  Stretch'd to their neighbours with a long embrace:
  And the new leaves on every bough were seen,
  Some ruddy colour'd, some of lighter green.

RHYME a a *

  The painted birds, companions of the spring,
  Hopping from spray to spray, were heard to sing.
  Both eyes and ears received a like delight,
  Enchanting music, and a charming sight.
  On Philomel I fix'd my whole desire,                      
  And listen'd for the queen of all the quire;
  Fain would I hear her heavenly voice to sing;
  And wanted yet an omen to the spring.

RHYME a a *

    Attending long in vain, I took the way
  Which through a path but scarcely printed lay;
  In narrow mazes oft it seem'd to meet,
  And look'd as lightly press'd by fairy feet.
  Wandering I walk'd alone, for still methought
  To some strange end so strange a path was wrought:
  At last it led me where an arbour stood,                  
  The sacred receptacle of the wood:

RHYME a a *

  This place unmark'd, though oft I walk'd the green,
  In all my progress I had never seen:
  And seized at once with wonder and delight,
  Gazed all around me, new to the transporting sight.
  'Twas bench'd with turf, and goodly to be seen,
  The thick young grass arose in fresher green:
  The mound was newly made, no sight could pass
  Betwixt the nice partitions of the grass,
  The well-united sods so closely lay;                      
  And all around the shades defended it from day;

RHYME a a *

  For sycamores with eglantine were spread,
  A hedge about the sides, a covering overhead.
  And so the fragrant brier was wove between,
  The sycamore and flowers were mixed with green,
  That nature seem'd to vary the delight,
  And satisfied at once the smell and sight.
  The master workman of the bower was known
  Through fairy-lands, and built for Oberon;
  Who twining leaves with such proportion drew,             
  They rose by measure, and by rule they grew;
  No mortal tongue can half the beauty tell;
  For none but hands divine could work so well.
  Both roof and sides were like a parlour made,
  A soft recess, and a cool summer shade;

RHYME a a *

  The hedge was set so thick, no foreign eye
  The persons placed within it could espy;
  But all that pass'd without with ease was seen,
  As if nor fence nor tree was placed between.
  'Twas border'd with a field; and some was plain           
  With grass, and some was sow'd with rising grain.
  That (now the dew with spangles deck'd the ground)
  A sweeter spot of earth was never found.

RHYME a a *

  I look'd, and look'd, and still with new delight;
  Such joy my soul, such pleasures fill'd my sight;
  And the fresh eglantine exhaled a breath,
  Whose odours were of power to raise from death.
  Nor sullen discontent, nor anxious care,
  Even though brought thither, could inhabit there:
  But thence they fled as from their mortal foe;      
  For this sweet place could only pleasure know.

RHYME a a *

    Thus as I mused, I cast aside my eye,
  And saw a medlar-tree was planted nigh.
  The spreading branches made a goodly show,
  And full of opening blooms was every bough:
  A goldfinch there I saw, with gaudy pride
  Of painted plumes, that hopp'd from side to side,
  Still pecking as she pass'd; and still she drew
  The sweets from every flower, and suck'd the dew:
  Sufficed at length, she warbled in her throat,      
  And tuned her voice to many a merry note,
  But indistinct, and neither sweet nor clear,
  Yet such as soothed my soul, and pleased my ear.

RHYME a a *

    Her short performance was no sooner tried,
  When she I sought, the nightingale, replied:
  So sweet, so shrill, so variously she sung,
  That the grove echoed, and the valleys rung;
  And I so ravish'd with her heavenly note,
  I stood entranced, and had no room for thought,
  But all o'er-power'd with ecstasy of bliss,         
  Was in a pleasing dream of paradise.
  At length I waked, and looking round the bower,
  Search'd every tree, and pry'd on every flower,
  If any where by chance I might espy
  The rural poet of the melody;
  For still methought she sung not far away:
  At last I found her on a laurel spray.
  Close by my side she sat, and fair in sight,
  Full in a line, against her opposite;
  Where stood with eglantine the laurel twined;       
  And both their native sweets were well conjoin'd.

RHYME a a *

    On the green bank I sat, and listen'd long;
  (Sitting was more convenient for the song):
  Nor till her lay was ended could I move,
  But wish'd to dwell for ever in the grove.
  Only methought the time too swiftly pass'd,
  And every note I fear'd would be the last.
  My sight and smell, and hearing were employ'd,
  And all three senses in full gust enjoy'd.
  And what alone did all the rest surpass,            
  The sweet possession of the fairy place;
  Single, and conscious to myself alone
  Of pleasures to the excluded world unknown:
  Pleasures which nowhere else were to be found,
  And all Elysium in a spot of ground.

RHYME a a b b c c c d d e e 

    Thus while I sat intent to see and hear,
  And drew perfumes of more than vital air,
  All suddenly I heard the approaching sound
  Of vocal music on the enchanted ground:
  A host of saints it seem'd, so full the quire;      
  As if the bless'd above did all conspire
  To join their voices, and neglect the lyre.
  At length there issued from the grove behind
  A fair assembly of the female kind:
  A train less fair, as ancient fathers tell,
  Seduced the sons of heaven to rebel.

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e 

  I pass their form, and every charming grace,
  Less than an angel would their worth debase:
  But their attire, like liveries of a kind,
  All rich and rare, is fresh within my mind.         
  In velvet white as snow the troop was gown'd,
  The seams with sparkling emeralds set around;
  Their hoods and sleeves the same; and purfled o'er
  With diamonds, pearls, and all the shining store
  Of eastern pomp: their long descending train,
  With rubies edged, and sapphires, swept the plain:

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e e 

  High on their heads, with jewels richly set,
  Each lady wore a radiant coronet.
  Beneath the circles, all the quire was graced
  With chaplets green on their fair foreheads placed: 
  Of laurel some, of woodbine many more;
  And wreaths of Agnus castus[g e ] others bore;
  These last, who with those virgin crowns were dress'd,
  Appear'd in higher honour than the rest.
  They danced around: but in the midst was seen
  A lady of a more majestic mien;
  By stature, and by beauty mark'd their sovereign queen

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e f f g g 

    She in the midst began with sober grace;
  Her servants' eyes were fix'd upon her face;
  And as she moved or turn'd, her motions view'd,     
  Her measures kept, and step by step pursued.
  Methought she trod the ground with greater grace,
  With more of godhead shining in her face;
  And as in beauty she surpass'd the quire,
  So, nobler than the rest, was her attire.
  A crown of ruddy gold enclosed her brow,
  Plain without pomp, and rich without a show:
  A branch of Agnus castus in her hand
  She bore aloft (her sceptre of command);
  Admired, adored by all the circling crowd,          
  For wheresoe'er she turn'd her face, they bow'd:

RHYME a a b b b c c d d 

  And as she danced, a roundelay she sung,
  In honour of the laurel, ever young:
  She raised her voice on high, and sung so clear,
  The fawns came scudding from the groves to hear:
  And all the bending forest lent an ear.
  At every close she made, the attending throng
  Replied, and bore the burden of the song:
  So just, so small, yet in so sweet a note,
  It seem'd the music melted in the throat.           

RHYME a a *

    Thus dancing on, and singing as they danced,
  They to the middle of the mead advanced,
  Till round my arbour a new ring they made,
  And footed it about the sacred shade.
  O'erjoy'd to see the jolly troops so near,
  But somewhat awed, I shook with holy fear;
  Yet not so much, but what I noted well
  Who did the most in song or dance excel.

RHYME a a *

    Not long I had observed, when from afar
  I heard a sudden symphony of war;                   
  The neighing coursers, and the soldiers cry,
  And sounding trumps, that seem'd to tear the sky:
  I saw soon after this, behind the grove
  From whence the ladies did in order move,
  Come issuing out in arms a warrior train,
  That like a deluge pour'd upon the plain;

RHYME a a *

  On barbed steeds they rode in proud array,
  Thick as the college of the bees in May,
  When swarming o'er the dusky fields they fly,
  New to the flowers, and intercept the sky,          
  So fierce they drove, their coursers were so fleet,
  That the turf trembled underneath their feet.

RHYME a a b b c c d d d e e f f 

    To tell their costly furniture were long,
  The summer's day would end before the song:
  To purchase but the tenth of all their store,
  Would make the mighty Persian monarch poor.
  Yet what I can, I will; before the rest
  The trumpets issued, in white mantles dress'd,
  A numerous troop, and all their heads around
  With chaplets green of cerrial-oak[g f ] were crown'd,
  And at each trumpet was a banner bound;
  Which, waving in the wind, displayed at large
  Their master's coat of arms, and knightly charge.
  Broad were the banners, and of snowy hue,
  A purer web the silk-worm never drew.

RHYME a a *

  The chief about their necks the scutcheons wore,
  With orient pearls and jewels powder'd o'er:
  Broad were their collars too, and every one
  Was set about with many a costly stone.
  Next these, of kings-at-arms a goodly train         
  In proud array came prancing o'er the plain:
  Their cloaks were cloth of silver mix'd with gold,
  And garlands green around their temples roll'd:

RHYME a a *

  Rich crowns were on their royal scutcheons placed,
  With sapphires, diamonds, and with rubies graced:
  And as the trumpets their appearance made,
  So these in habits were alike array'd;
  But with a pace more sober, and more slow;
  And twenty, rank in rank, they rode a-row.
  The pursuivants came next, in number more;          
  And, like the heralds, each his scutcheon bore:
  Clad in white velvet all their troop they led,
  With each an oaken chaplet on his head.

RHYME a a *

    Nine royal knights in equal rank succeed,
  Each warrior mounted on a fiery steed;
  In golden armour glorious to behold;
  The rivets of their arms were nail'd with gold.
  Their surcoats of white ermine fur were made;
  With cloth of gold between, that cast a glittering shade.
  The trappings of their steeds were of the same;     
  The golden fringe even set the ground on flame,
  And drew a precious trail: a crown divine
  Of laurel did about their temples twine.

RHYME a a b b c c d d d e e 

    Three henchmen were for every knight assign'd,
  All in rich livery clad, and of a kind;
  White velvet, but unshorn, for cloaks they wore,
  And each within his hand a truncheon bore:
  The foremost held a helm of rare device;
  A prince's ransom would not pay the price.
  The second bore the buckler of his knight,          
  The third of cornel-wood a spear upright,
  Headed with piercing steel, and polish'd bright.
  Like to their lords their equipage was seen,
  And all their foreheads crown'd with garlands green.

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e 

    And after these came, arm'd with spear and shield,
  A host so great as cover'd all the field:
  And all their foreheads, like the knights before,
  With laurels ever-green were shaded o'er,
  Or oak, or other leaves of lasting kind,
  Tenacious of the stem, and firm against the wind.   
  Some in their hands, beside the lance and shield,
  The boughs of woodbine, or of hawthorn held,
  Or branches for their mystic emblems took,
  Of palm, of laurel, and of cerrial-oak.

RHYME a a a

    Thus marching to the trumpet's lofty sound,
  Drawn in two lines adverse they wheel'd around,
  And in the middle meadow took their ground.

RHYME a a *

  Among themselves the tourney they divide,
  In equal squadrons ranged on either side.
  Then turn'd their horses' heads, and man to man,    
  And steed to steed opposed, the jousts began.
  They lightly set their lances in the rest,
  And, at the sign, against each other press'd:
  They met. I sitting at my ease beheld
  The mix'd events, and fortunes of the field.

RHYME a a *

  Some broke their spears, some tumbled horse and man,
  And round the field the lighten'd coursers ran.
  An hour and more, like tides, in equal sway
  They rush'd, and won by turns, and lost the day:

RHYME a a a

  At length the nine (who still together held)        
  Their fainting foes to shameful flight compell'd,
  And with resistless force o'er-ran the field.

RHYME a a *

  Thus, to their fame, when finish'd was the fight,
  The victors from their lofty steeds alight:
  Like them dismounted all the warlike train,
  And two by two proceeded o'er the plain,
  Till to the fair assembly they advanced,
  Who near the secret arbour sung and danced.

RHYME a a a

    The ladies left their measures at the sight,
  To meet the chiefs returning from the fight,        
  And each with open arms embraced her chosen knight.
  
RHYME a a *

  Amid the plain a spreading laurel stood,
  The grace and ornament of all the wood:
  That pleasing shade they sought, a soft retreat
  From sudden April showers, a shelter from the heat:
  Her leafy arms with such extent were spread.
  So near the clouds was her aspiring head,
  That hosts of birds, that wing the liquid air,
  Perch'd in the boughs, had nightly lodging there:
  And flocks of sheep beneath the shade from far      
  Might hear the rattling hail, and wintry war;

RHYME a a *

  From heaven's inclemency here found retreat,
  Enjoy'd the cool, and shunn'd the scorching heat:
  A hundred knights might there at ease abide;
  And every knight a lady by his side:
  The trunk itself such odours did bequeath,
  That a Moluccan[g g ] breeze to these was common breath.

RHYME a a a

  The lords and ladies here, approaching, paid
  Their homage, with a low obeisance made;
  And seem'd to venerate the sacred shade.            

RHYME a a *

  These rites perform'd, their pleasures they pursue,
  With song of love, and mix with measures new;
  Around the holy tree their dance they frame,
  And every champion leads his chosen dame.

RHYME a a *

    I cast my sight upon the farther field,
  And a fresh object of delight beheld:
  For from the region of the West I heard
  New music sound, and a new troop appear'd;
  Of knights and ladies mix'd, a jolly band,
  But all on foot they march'd, and hand in hand.     

RHYME a a a

    The ladies dress'd in rich symars were seen
  Of Florence satin, flower'd with white and green,
  And for a shade betwixt the bloomy gridelin.

RHYME a a *

  The borders of their petticoats below
  Were guarded thick with rubies on a row;
  And every damsel wore upon her head
  Of flowers a garland blended white and red.
  Attired in mantles all the knights were seen,
  That gratified the view with cheerful green:

RHYME a a *

  Their chaplets of their ladies' colours were,       
  Composed of white and red, to shade their shining hair.
  Before the merry troop the minstrels play'd;
  All in their masters' liveries were array'd,
  And clad in green, and on their temples wore
  The chaplets white and red their ladies bore.
  Their instruments were various in their kind,
  Some for the bow, and some for breathing wind;
  The sawtry, pipe, and hautboy's noisy band,
  And the soft lute trembling beneath the touching hand.

RHYME a a *

  A tuft of daisies on a flowery lea                  
  They saw, and thitherward they bent their way;
  To this both knights and dames their homage made,
  And due obeisance to the daisy paid.
  And then the band of flutes began to play,
  To which a lady sung a virelay:[g h ]
  And still at every close she would repeat
  The burden of the song, _The daisy is so sweet,
  The daisy is so sweet_: when she begun,
  The troop of knights and dames continued on.
  The concert and the voice so charm'd my ear,
  And soothed my soul, that it was heaven to hear.    

RHYME a a *

    But soon their pleasure pass'd: at noon of day
  The sun with sultry beams began to play:
  Not Sirius shoots a fiercer flame from high,
  When with his poisonous breath he blasts the sky:

RHYME a a a

  Then droop'd the fading flowers (their beauty fled)
  And closed their sickly eyes, and hung the head;
  And rivell'd up with heat, lay dying in their bed.

RHYME a a *

  The ladies gasp'd, and scarcely could respire;
  The breath they drew, no longer air but fire;       
  The fainty knights were scorch'd, and knew not where
  To run for shelter, for no shade was near;
  And after this the gathering clouds amain
  Pour'd down a storm of rattling hail and rain;
  And lightning flash'd betwixt: the field, and flowers,
  Burnt up before, were buried in the showers.

RHYME a a *

  The ladies and the knights, no shelter nigh,
  Bare to the weather and the wintry sky,
  Were drooping wet, disconsolate, and wan,
  And through their thin array received the rain;     
  While those in white, protected by the tree,
  Saw pass in vain the assault, and stood from danger free;
  But as compassion moved their gentle minds,
  When ceased the storm, and silent were the winds,

RHYME a a *

  Displeased at what, not suffering they had seen,
  They went to cheer the faction of the green.
  The queen in white array, before her band,
  Saluting, took her rival by the hand;
  So did the knights and dames, with courtly grace,
  And with behaviour sweet their foes embrace;        
  Then thus the queen with laurel on her brow--
  Fair sister, I have suffer'd in your woe;

RHYME a a *

  Nor shall be wanting aught within my power
  For your relief in my refreshing bower.
  That other answer'd with a lowly look,
  And soon the gracious invitation took:
  For ill at ease both she and all her train
  The scorching sun had borne, and beating rain.
  Like courtesy was used by all in white,
  Each dame a dame received, and every knight a knight.   

RHYME a a *

  The laurel champions with their swords invade
  The neighbouring forests, where the jousts were made,
  And serewood from the rotten hedges took,
  And seeds of latent fire, from flints provoke:
  A cheerful blaze arose, and by the fire
  They warm'd their frozen feet, and dried their wet attire.
  Refresh'd with heat, the ladies sought around
  For virtuous herbs, which, gather'd from the ground,
  They squeezed the juice, and cooling ointment made,
  Which on their sun-burnt cheeks, and their chapt skins they laid:  
  Then sought green salads, which they bade them eat,
  A sovereign remedy for inward heat.

RHYME a a *

    The Lady of the Leaf ordain'd a feast,
  And made the Lady of the Flower her guest:
  When, lo! a bower ascended on the plain,
  With sudden seats ordain'd, and large for either train.
  This bower was near my pleasant arbour placed,
  That I could hear and see whatever pass'd:
  The ladies sat with each a knight between,
  Distinguish'd by their colours, white and green;    

RHYME a a *

  The vanquish'd party with the victors join'd,
  Nor wanted sweet discourse, the banquet of the mind.
  Meantime the minstrels play'd on either side,
  Vain of their art, and for the mastery vied:
  The sweet contention lasted for an hour,
  And reach'd my secret arbour from the bower.

RHYME a a *

    The sun was set; and Vesper, to supply
  His absent beams, had lighted up the sky.
  When Philomel, officious all the day
  To sing the service of the ensuing May,             
  Fled from her laurel shade, and wing'd her flight
  Directly to the queen array'd in white:
  And, hopping, sat familiar on her hand,
  A new musician, and increased the band.

RHYME a a *

    The goldfinch, who, to shun the scalding heat,
  Had changed the medlar for a safer seat,
  And hid in bushes 'scaped the bitter shower,
  Now perch'd upon the Lady of the Flower;
  And either songster holding out their throats,
  And folding up their wings, renew'd their notes:    
  As if all day, precluding to the fight,
  They only had rehearsed, to sing by night.
  The banquet ended, and the battle done,
  They danced by star-light and the friendly moon:
  And when they were to part, the laureate queen
  Supplied with steeds the lady of the green,
  Her and her train conducting on the way,
  The moon to follow, and avoid the day.

RHYME a a *

    This when I saw, inquisitive to know
  The secret moral of the mystic show,                
  I started from my shade, in hopes to find
  Some nymph to satisfy my longing mind:
  And as my fair adventure fell, I found
  A lady all in white, with laurel crown'd,
  Who closed the rear, and softly paced along,
  Repeating to herself the former song.
  With due respect my body I inclined,
  As to some being of superior kind,
  And made my court according to the day,
  Wishing her queen and her a happy May.              
  Great thanks, my daughter, with a gracious bow,
  She said; and I, who much desired to know
  Of whence she was, yet fearful how to break
  My mind, adventured humbly thus to speak:

RHYME a a *

  Madam, might I presume and not offend,
  So may the stars and shining moon attend

RHYME a a a

  Your nightly sports, as you vouchsafe to tell,
  What nymphs they were who mortal forms excel,
  And what the knights who fought in listed fields so well.

RHYME a a *

  To this the dame replied: Fair daughter, know,      
  That what you saw was all a fairy show;
  And all those airy shapes you now behold,
  Were human bodies once, and clothed with earthly mould;
  Our souls, not yet prepared for upper light,
  Till doomsday wander in the shades of night;

RHYME a a *

  This only holiday of all the year,
  We privileged in sunshine may appear:
  With songs and dance we celebrate the day,
  And with due honours usher in the May.
  At other times we reign by night alone,             
  And posting through the skies pursue the moon;
  But when the morn arises, none are found;
  For cruel Demogorgon walks the round,
  And if he finds a fairy lag in light,
  He drives the wretch before, and lashes into night.

RHYME a a *

    All courteous are by kind; and ever proud
  With friendly offices to help the good.
  In every land we have a larger space
  Than what is known to you of mortal race;
  Where we with green adorn our fairy bowers,         
  And even this grove, unseen before, is ours.
  Know farther; every lady clothed in white,
  And, crown'd with oak and laurel every knight,
  Are servants to the Leaf, by liveries known
  Of innocence; and I myself am one.
  Saw you not her, so graceful to behold,
  In white attire, and crown'd with radiant gold?
  The sovereign lady of our land is she,
  Diana call'd, the Queen of Chastity:
  And, for the spotless name of maid she bears,       
  That Agnus castus in her hand appears;

RHYME a a *

  And all her train, with leafy chaplets crown'd,
  Were for unblamed virginity renown'd;
  But those the chief and highest in command
  Who bear those holy branches in their hand:

RHYME a a a

  The knights adorn'd with laurel crowns are they,
  Whom death nor danger ever could dismay,
  Victorious names, who made the world obey;

RHYME a a *

  Who, while they lived, in deeds of arms excell'd,
  And after death for deities were held.              
  But those who wear the woodbine on their brow,
  Were knights of love, who never broke their vow;
  Firm to their plighted faith, and ever free
  From fears and fickle chance, and jealousy.
  The lords and ladies, who the woodbine bear,
  As true as Tristram and Isotta were.

RHYME a a *

    But what are those, said I, the unconquer'd nine,
  Who, crown'd with laurel-wreaths, in golden armour shine?
  And who the knights in green, and what the train
  Of ladies dress'd with daisies on the plain?        
  Why both the bands in worship disagree,
  And some adore the flower, and some the tree?

RHYME a a *

    Just is your suit, fair daughter, said the dame:
  Those laurell'd chiefs were men of mighty fame;
  Nine worthies were they call'd of different rites,
  Three Jews, three Pagans, and three Christian knights.

RHYME a a a
 
 These, as you see, ride foremost in the field,
  As they the foremost rank of honour held,
  And all in deeds of chivalry excell'd:

RHYME a a *

  Their temples wreathed with leaves, that still renew;   
  For deathless laurel is the victor's due:
  Who bear the bows were knights in Arthur's reign,
  Twelve they, and twelve the peers of Charlemagne:
  For bows the strength of brawny arms imply,
  Emblems of valour, and of victory.

RHYME a a *

  Behold an order yet of newer date,
  Doubling their number, equal in their state;
  Our England's ornament, the crown's defence,
  In battle brave, protectors of their prince;
  Unchanged by fortune, to their sovereign true,      
  For which their manly legs are bound with blue.

RHYME a a a

  These, of the Garter call'd, of faith unstain'd,
  In fighting fields the laurel have obtain'd,
  And well repaid the honours which they gain'd.

RHYME a a *

  The laurel wreaths were first by Cesar worn,
  And still they Cesar's successors adorn:
  One leaf of this is immortality,
  And more of worth than all the world can buy.

RHYME a a *

    One doubt remains, said I, the dames in green,
  What were their qualities, and who their queen?     
  Flora commands, said she, those nymphs and knights,
  Who lived in slothful ease and loose delights;
  Who never acts of honour durst pursue,
  The men inglorious knights, the ladies all untrue:
  Who, nursed in idleness, and train'd in courts,
  Pass'd all their precious hours in plays, and sports,
  Till death behind came stalking on, unseen,
  And wither'd (like the storm) the freshness of their green.
  These, and their mates, enjoy their present hour,
  And therefore pay their homage to the Flower:       

RHYME a a a

  But knights in knightly deeds should persevere,
  And still continue what at first they were;
  Continue, and proceed in honour's fair career.

RHYME a a *

  No room for cowardice, or dull delay;
  From good to better they should urge their way.
  For this with golden spurs the chiefs are graced,
  With pointed rowels arm'd to mend their haste;

RHYME a a a

  For this with lasting leaves their brows are bound;
  For laurel is the sign of labour crown'd,
  Which bears the bitter blast, nor shaken falls to ground:

RHYME a a *

  From winter winds it suffers no decay,
  For ever fresh and fair, and every month is May.

RHYME a a *

  Even when the vital sap retreats below,
  Even when the hoary head is hid in snow,
  The life is in the Leaf, and still between
  The fits of falling snow appears the streaky green.
  Not so the Flower, which lasts for little space,
  A short-lived good, and an uncertain grace;
  This way, and that, the feeble stem is driven,
  Weak to sustain the storms and injuries of heaven.  

RHYME a a a

  Propp'd by the spring, it lifts aloft the head,
  But of a sickly beauty, soon to shed;
  In summer living, and in winter dead.

RHYME a a *

  For things of tender kind, for pleasure made,
  Shoot up with swift increase, and sudden are decay'd.

RHYME a a *

    With humble words, the wisest I could frame,
  And proffer'd service, I repaid the dame;
  That, of her grace, she gave her maid to know
  The secret meaning of this moral show.
  And she, to prove what profit I had made            
  Of mystic truth, in fables first convey'd,
  Demanded, till the next returning May,
  Whether the Leaf or Flower I would obey?
  I chose the Leaf; she smiled with sober cheer,
  And wish'd me fair adventure for the year,
  And gave me charms and sigils, for defence
  Against ill tongues that scandal innocence:
  But I, said she, my fellows must pursue,
  Already past the plain, and out of view.

RHYME a a a b b 

    We parted thus; I homeward sped my way,           
  Bewilder'd in the wood till dawn of day;
  And met the merry crew who danced about the May.
  Then late refresh'd with sleep, I rose to write
  The visionary vigils of the night.

RHYME a a b b 

    Blush, as thou may'st, my little book, with shame,
  Nor hope with homely verse to purchase fame;
  For such thy maker chose; and so design'd
  Thy simple style to suit thy lowly kind.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  In days of old, when Arthur fill'd the throne,
  Whose acts and fame to foreign lands were blown;
  The king of elves and little fairy queen
  Gamboll'd on heaths, and danced on every green;
  And where the jolly troop had led the round,
  The grass unbidden rose, and mark'd the ground:

RHYME a a a

  Nor darkling did they dance, the silver light
  Of Phoebe served to guide their steps aright,
  And with their tripping pleased, prolong the night.

RHYME a a a

  Her beams they follow'd, where at full she play'd,        
  Nor longer than she shed her horns they stay'd;
  From thence with airy flight to foreign lands convey'd

RHYME a a a

  Above the rest our Britain held they dear,
  More solemnly they kept their sabbaths here,
  And made more spacious rings, and revell'd half the year.

RHYME a a a

    I speak of ancient times, for now the swain
  Returning late may pass the woods in vain,
  And never hope to see the nightly train:

RHYME a a a

  In vain the dairy now with mints is dress'd,
  The dairymaid expects no fairy guest,                     
  To skim the bowls, and after pay the feast.

RHYME a a *

  She sighs and shakes her empty shoes in vain,
  No silver penny to reward her pain:
  For priests, with prayers, and other godly gear,
  Have made the merry goblins disappear;
  And where they play'd their merry pranks before,
  Have sprinkled holy water on the floor:

RHYME a a *

  And friars, that through the wealthy regions run,
  Thick as the motes that twinkle in the sun,
  Resort to farmers rich, and bless their halls,            
  And exorcise the beds, and cross the walls:
  This makes the fairy quires forsake the place,
  When once 'tis hallow'd with the rites of grace:

RHYME a a a

  But in the walks where wicked elves have been,
  The learning of the parish now is seen,
  The midnight parson, posting o'er the green,

RHYME a a a

  With gown tuck'd up, to wakes, for Sunday next,
  With humming ale encouraging his text;
  Nor wants the holy leer to country girl betwixt.

RHYME a a *

  From fiends and imps he sets the village free,            
  There haunts not any incubus but he.
  The maids and women need no danger fear
  To walk by night, and sanctity so near:
  For by some haycock, or some shady thorn,
  He bids his beads both even-song and morn.

RHYME a a a

    It so befell, in this King Arthur's reign,
  A lusty knight was pricking o'er the plain;
  A bachelor he was, and of the courtly train.

RHYME a a *

  It happen'd, as he rode, a damsel gay,
  In russet robes, to market took her way.                  
  Soon on the girl he cast an amorous eye,
  So straight she walk'd, and on her pasterns high:
  If, seeing her behind, he liked her pace,
  Now turning short, he better likes her face.
  He lights in haste, and, full of youthful fire,
  By force accomplish'd his obscene desire:
  This done, away he rode, not unespied,
  For swarming at his back the country cried:
  And once in view they never lost the sight,
  But seized, and pinion'd brought to court the knight,     

RHYME a a *

    Then courts of kings were held in high renown,
  Ere made the common brothels of the town:
  There, virgins honourable vows received,
  But chaste as maids in monasteries lived:
  The king himself, to nuptial ties a slave,
  No bad example to his poets gave:
  And they, not bad, but in a vicious age,
  Had not, to please the prince, debauch'd the stage.

RHYME a a *

    Now, what should Arthur do? He loved the knight,
  But sovereign monarchs are the source of right:           
  Moved by the damsel's tears and common cry,
  He doom'd the brutal ravisher to die.
  But fair Geneura rose in his defence,
  And pray'd so hard for mercy from the prince,
  That to his queen the king the offender gave,
  And left it in her power to kill or save:
  This gracious act the ladies all approve,
  Who thought it much a man should die for love;

RHYME a a a

  And with their mistress join'd in close debate,
  (Covering their kindness with dissembled hate)            
  If not to free him, to prolong his fate.

RHYME a a *

  At last agreed, they call him by consent
  Before the queen and female parliament;
  And the fair speaker, rising from the chair,
  Did thus the judgment of the house declare:

RHYME a a *

    Sir knight, though I have ask'd thy life, yet still
  Thy destiny depends upon my will:
  Nor hast thou other surety than the grace
  Not due to thee from our offended race.
  But as our kind is of a softer mould,                     
  And cannot blood without a sigh behold,
  I grant thee life; reserving still the power
  To take the forfeit when I see my hour:
  Unless thy answer to my next demand
  Shall set thee free from our avenging hand.

RHYME a a *

  The question, whose solution I require,
  Is, What the sex of women most desire?
  In this dispute thy judges are at strife;
  Beware; for on thy wit depends thy life.
  Yet (lest surprised, unknowing what to say,         
  Thou damn thyself) we give thee farther day:
  A year is thine to wander at thy will,
  And learn from others, if thou want'st the skill.
  But, not to hold our proffer turn'd to scorn,
  Good sureties will we have for thy return;
  That at the time prefix'd thou shalt obey,
  And at thy pledge's peril keep thy day.

RHYME a a *

    Woe was the knight at this severe command;
  But well he knew 'twas bootless to withstand:
  The terms accepted, as the fair ordain,             
  He put in bail for his return again,
  And promised answer at the day assign'd,
  The best, with Heaven's assistance, he could find.

RHYME a a a

    His leave thus taken, on his way he went
  With heavy heart, and full of discontent,
  Misdoubting much, and fearful of the event.

RHYME a a *

  'Twas hard the truth of such a point to find,
  As was not yet agreed among the kind.
  Thus on he went; still anxious more and more,
  Ask'd all he met, and knock'd at every door;        
  Inquired of men; but made his chief request,
  To learn from women what they loved the best.
  They answer'd each according to her mind,
  To please herself, not all the female kind.
  One was for wealth, another was for place;
  Crones, old and ugly, wish'd a better face:

RHYME a a *

  The widow's wish was oftentimes to wed;
  The wanton maids were all for sport a-bed.
  Some said the sex were pleased with handsome lies,
  And some gross flattery loved without disguise:     
  Truth is, says one, he seldom fails to win
  Who flatters well; for that's our darling sin:
  But long attendance, and a duteous mind,
  Will work even with the wisest of the kind.

RHYME a a *

  One thought the sex's prime felicity
  Was from the bonds of wedlock to be free;
  Their pleasures, hours, and actions all their own,
  And uncontroll'd to give account to none.
  Some wish a husband-fool; but such are cursed,
  For fools perverse of husbands are the worst:       
  All women would be counted chaste and wise,
  Nor should our spouses see, but with our eyes;
  For fools will prate; and though they want the wit
  To find close faults, yet open blots will hit;

RHYME a a *

  Though better for their ease to hold their tongue,
  For womankind was never in the wrong.
  So noise ensues, and quarrels last for life;
  The wife abhors the fool, the fool the wife.
  And some men say that great delight have we,
  To be for truth extoll'd, and secrecy;              
  And constant in one purpose still to dwell;
  And not our husbands' counsels to reveal.
  But that's a fable; for our sex is frail,
  Inventing rather than not tell a tale.
  Like leaky sieves, no secrets we can hold:
  Witness the famous tale that Ovid told.

RHYME a a *

    Midas the king, as in his book appears,
  By Phoebus was endow'd with ass's ears,
  Which under his long locks he well conceal'd,
  (As monarchs' vices must not be reveal'd)           
  For fear the people have them in the wind,
  Who long ago were neither dumb nor blind:
  Nor apt to think from Heaven their title springs,
  Since Jove and Mars left off begetting kings.
  This Midas knew; and durst communicate
  To none but to his wife his ears of state:
  One must be trusted, and he thought her fit,
  As passing prudent, and a parlous wit.
  To this sagacious confessor he went,
  And told her what a gift the gods had sent:         

RHYME a a *

  But told it under matrimonial seal,
  With strict injunction never to reveal.
  The secret heard, she plighted him her troth,
  (And sacred sure is every woman's oath)
  The royal malady should rest unknown,
  Both for her husband's honour and her own;
  But ne'ertheless she pined with discontent;
  The counsel rumbled till it found a vent.

RHYME a a a

  The thing she knew she was obliged to hide;
  By interest and by oath the wife was tied;          
  But if she told it not, the woman died.

RHYME a a a

  Loath to betray a husband and a prince,
  But she must burst, or blab; and no pretence
  Of honour tied her tongue from self-defence.

RHYME a a *

  A marshy ground commodiously was near,
  Thither she ran, and held her breath for fear;
  Lest if a word she spoke of any thing,
  That word might be the secret of the king.
  Thus full of counsel to the fen she went,
  Griped all the way, and longing for a vent;         

RHYME a a *

  Arrived, by pure necessity compell'd,
  On her majestic marrow-bones she kneel'd:
  Then to the water's brink she laid her head,
  And as a bittour[g i ] bumps within a reed,
  To thee alone, O lake, she said, I tell,
  (And, as thy queen, command thee to conceal!)
  Beneath his locks the king, my husband wears
  A goodly royal pair of ass's ears:
  Now I have eased my bosom of the pain,
  Till the next longing fit return again.             

RHYME a a *

    Thus through a woman was the secret known;
  Tell us, and in effect you tell the town.
  But to my tale; the knight with heavy cheer,
  Wandering in vain, had now consumed the year:
  One day was only left to solve the doubt,
  Yet knew no more than when he first set out.
  But home he must, and as the award had been,
  Yield up his body captive to the queen.
  In this despairing state he happ'd to ride,
  As fortune led him, by a forest side:               
  Lonely the vale, and full of horror stood,
  Brown with the shade of a religious wood!
  When full before him, at the noon of night,
  (The moon was up, and shot a gleamy light)

RHYME a a *

  He saw a quire of ladies in a round
  That featly footing seem'd to skim the ground:
  Thus dancing hand in hand, so light they were,
  He knew not where they trod, on earth or air.

RHYME a a a

  At speed he drove, and came a sudden guest,
  In hope where many women were, at least             
  Some one by chance might answer his request.

RHYME a a *

  But faster than his horse the ladies flew,
  And in a trice were vanish'd out of view.
    One only hag remain'd; but fouler far
  Than grandame apes in Indian forests are:

RHYME a a a

  Against a wither'd oak she lean'd her weight,
  Propp'd on her trusty staff, not half upright,
  And dropp'd an awkward courtesy to the knight;

RHYME a a *

  Then said, What makes you, sir, so late abroad
  Without a guide, and this no beaten road?           
  Or want you aught that here you hope to find,
  Or travel for some trouble in your mind?
  The last I guess; and if I read aright,
  Those of our sex are bound to serve a knight;
  Perhaps good counsel may your grief assuage,
  Then tell your pain; for wisdom is in age.

RHYME a a *

    To this the knight: Good mother, would you know
  The secret cause and spring of all my woe?
  My life must with to-morrow's light expire,
  Unless I tell what women most desire.               
  Now could you help me at this hard essay,
  Or for your inborn goodness, or for pay;
  Yours is my life, redeem'd by your advice,
  Ask what you please, and I will pay the price;
  The proudest kerchief of the court shall rest
  Well satisfied of what they love the best.
  Plight me thy faith, quoth she, that what I ask,
  Thy danger over, and perform'd thy task,
  That thou shalt give for hire of thy demand;
  Here take thy oath, and seal it on my hand;         
  I warrant thee, on peril of my life,
  Thy words shall please both widow, maid, and wife.

RHYME a a *

    More words there needed not to move the knight
  To take her offer, and his truth to plight.
  With that she spread a mantle on the ground,
  And, first inquiring whither he was bound,
  Bade him not fear, though long and rough the way,
  At court he should arrive ere break of day;

RHYME a a a

  His horse should find the way without a guide.
  She said: with fury they began to ride,             
  He on the midst, the beldam at his side.

RHYME a a *

  The horse what devil drove I cannot tell,
  But only this, they sped their journey well:
  And all the way the crone inform'd the knight,
  How he should answer the demand aright.

RHYME a a *

    To court they came; the news was quickly spread
  Of his returning to redeem his head.
  The female senate was assembled soon,
  With all the mob of women in the town:
  The queen sat lord chief-justice of the hall,       
  And bade the crier cite the criminal.
  The knight appear'd; and silence they proclaim;
  Then first the culprit answer'd to his name:
  And, after forms of law, was last required
  To name the thing that women most desired.

RHYME a a *

    The offender, taught his lesson by the way,
  And by his counsel order'd what to say,
  Thus bold began: My lady liege, said he,
  What all your sex desire is Sovereignty.
  The wife affects her husband to command;            
  All must be hers, both money, house, and land.
  The maids are mistresses even in their name;
  And of their servants full dominion claim.

RHYME a a a

  This, at the peril of my head, I say,
  A blunt plain truth, the sex aspires to sway,
  You to rule all, while we, like slaves, obey.

RHYME a a *

  There was not one, or widow, maid, or wife,
  But said the knight had well deserved his life.
  Even fair Geneura, with a blush, confess'd
  The man had found what women love the best.

RHYME a a *

    Upstarts the beldam, who was there unseen,        
  And, reverence made, accosted thus the queen:
  My liege, said she, before the court arise,
  May I, poor wretch, find favour in your eyes,
  To grant my just request? 'twas I who taught
  The knight this answer, and inspired his thought;
  None but a woman could a man direct
  To tell us women what we most affect.
  But first I swore him on his knightly troth,
  (And here demand performance of his oath)           

RHYME a a *

  To grant the boon that next I should desire;
  He gave his faith, and I expect my hire:
  My promise is fulfill'd; I saved his life,
  And claim his debt, to take me for his wife.
  The knight was ask'd, nor could his oath deny,
  But hoped they would not force him to comply.
  The women, who would rather wrest the laws,
  Than let a sister-plaintiff lose the cause,
  (As judges on the bench more gracious are,
  And more attent to brothers of the bar)             
  Cried one and all, the suppliant should have right,
  And to the grandame hag adjudged the knight.

RHYME a a *

    In vain he sigh'd, and oft with tears desired
  Some reasonable suit might be required.
  But still the crone was constant to her note;
  The more he spoke, the more she stretch'd her throat.
  In vain he proffer'd all his goods, to save
  His body destined to that living grave.
  The liquorish hag rejects the pelf with scorn;
  And nothing but the man would serve her turn.       
  Not all the wealth of eastern kings, said she,
  Have power to part my plighted love, and me;
  And, old and ugly as I am, and poor,
  Yet never will I break the faith I swore;
  For mine thou art by promise, during life,
  And I thy loving and obedient wife.

RHYME a a *

    My love! nay, rather, my damnation thou,
  Said he: nor am I bound to keep my vow:
  The fiend thy sire hath sent thee from below,
  Else how couldst thou my secret sorrows know?       

RHYME a a a

  Avaunt, old witch! for I renounce thy bed:
  The queen may take the forfeit of my head,
  Ere any of my race so foul a crone shall wed.

RHYME a a *

  Both heard, the judge pronounced against the knight;
  So was he married in his own despite;

RHYME a a *

  And all day after hid him as an owl,
  Not able to sustain a sight so foul.
  Perhaps the reader thinks I do him wrong,
  To pass the marriage feast, and nuptial song:
  Mirth there was none, the man was _a-la-mort_,      
  And little courage had to make his court.
  To bed they went, the bridegroom and the bride:
  Was never such an ill-pair'd couple tied,

RHYME a a *

  Restless, he toss'd and tumbled to and fro,
  And roll'd, and wriggled further off, for woe.
  The good old wife lay smiling by his side,
  And caught him in her quivering arms, and cried,

RHYME a a a

  When you my ravish'd predecessor saw,
  You were not then become this man of straw;
  Had you been such, you might have 'scaped the law.  

RHYME a a *

  Is this the custom of King Arthur's court?
  Are all round-table knights of such a sort?
  Remember, I am she who saved your life,
  Your loving, lawful, and complying wife:
  Not thus you swore in your unhappy hour,
  Nor I for this return employ'd my power.
  In time of need I was your faithful friend;
  Nor did I since, nor ever will offend.
  Believe me, my loved lord, 'tis much unkind;
  What fury has possess'd your alter'd mind?          

RHYME a a *

  Thus on my wedding night--without pretence--
  Come turn this way, or tell me my offence.
  If not your wife, let reason's rule persuade;
  Name but my fault, amends shall soon be made.
  Amends! nay, that's impossible, said he,
  What change of age or ugliness can be?

RHYME a a a

  Or could Medea's magic mend thy face,
  Thou art descended from so mean a race,
  That never knight was match'd with such disgrace.

RHYME a a *

  What wonder, madam, if I move my side,              
  When, if I turn, I turn to such a bride?
  And is this all that troubles you so sore?
  And what the devil couldst thou wish me more?
  Ah, Benedicite, replied the crone;
  Then cause of just complaining have you none.
  The remedy to this were soon applied,
  Would you be like the bridegroom to the bride:
  But, for you say a long descended race,
  And wealth and dignity, and power and place,

RHYME a a *

  Make gentlemen, and that your high degree           
  Is much disparaged to be match'd with me;
  Know this, my lord, nobility of blood
  Is but a glittering and fallacious good:
  The nobleman is he, whose noble mind
  Is fill'd with inborn worth, unborrow'd from his kind.
  The King of Heaven was in a manger laid,
  And took his earth but from an humble maid;
  Then what can birth, or mortal men, bestow?
  Since floods no higher than their fountains flow.
  We, who for name and empty honour strive,           
  Our true nobility from him derive.
  Your ancestors, who puff your mind with pride,
  And vast estates to mighty titles tied,
  Did not your honour, but their own, advance;
  For virtue comes not by inheritance.

RHYME a a *

  If you tralineate from your father's mind,
  What are you else but of a bastard kind?
  Do, as your great progenitors have done,
  And, by their virtues, prove yourself their son.
  No father can infuse or wit or grace;               
  A mother comes across, and mars the race.
  A grandsire or a grandame taints the blood;
  And seldom three descents continue good.
  Were virtue by descent, a noble name
  Could never villanise his father's fame;
  But, as the first, the last of all the line,
  Would, like the sun, even in descending shine;
  Take fire, and bear it to the darkest house,
  Betwixt King Arthur's court and Caucasus:

RHYME a a *

  If you depart, the flame shall still remain,        
  And the bright blaze enlighten all the plain:
  Nor, till the fuel perish, can decay,
  By nature form'd on things combustible to prey.
  Such is not man, who, mixing better seed
  With worse, begets a base degenerate breed:
  The bad corrupts the good, and leaves behind
  No trace of all the great begetter's mind.
  The father sinks within his son, we see,
  And often rises in the third degree;
  If better luck a better mother give,                
  Chance gave us being, and by chance we live.

RHYME a a a

  Such as our atoms were, even such are we,
  Or call it chance, or strong necessity:
  Thus loaded with dead weight, the will is free.

RHYME a a *

  And thus it needs must be; for seed conjoin'd
  Lets into nature's work the imperfect kind;
  But fire, the enlivener of the general frame,
  Is one, its operation still the same.

RHYME a a *

  Its principle is in itself: while ours
  Works, as confederates war, with mingled powers;    
  Or man or woman, which soever fails:
  And oft the vigour of the worse prevails.
  Aether with sulphur blended alters hue,
  And casts a dusky gleam of Sodom blue.
  Thus, in a brute, their ancient honour ends,
  And the fair mermaid in a fish descends:
  The line is gone; no longer duke or earl;
  But, by himself degraded, turns a churl.

RHYME a a a

  Nobility of blood is but renown
  Of thy great fathers by their virtue known,         
  And a long trail of light, to thee descending down.

RHYME a a *

  If in thy smoke it ends, their glories shine;
  But infamy and villanage are thine.
  Then what I said before is plainly show'd,
  The true nobility proceeds from God;
  Nor left us by inheritance, but given
  By bounty of our stars, and grace of Heaven.
  Thus from a captive Servius Tullius rose,
  Whom for his virtues the first Romans chose:

RHYME a a *

  Fabricius from their walls repell'd the foe,        
  Whose noble hands had exercised the plough.
  From hence, my lord, and love, I thus conclude,
  That though my homely ancestors were rude,
  Mean as I am, yet I may have the grace
  To make you father of a generous race:
  And noble then am I, when I begin,
  In virtue clothed, to cast the rags of sin.
  If poverty be my upbraided crime,
  And you believe in Heaven, there was a time

RHYME a a *

  When He, the great controller of our fate,          
  Deign'd to be man, and lived in low estate;
  Which He who had the world at his dispose,
  If poverty were vice, would never choose.
  Philosophers have said, and poets sing,
  That a glad poverty's an honest thing.
  Content is wealth, the riches of the mind;
  And happy he who can that treasure find.

RHYME a a a

  But the base miser starves amidst his store,
  Broods on his gold, and, griping still at more,
  Sits sadly pining, and believes he's poor.          

RHYME a a *

  The ragged beggar, though he want relief,
  Has not to lose, and sings before the thief.
  Want is a bitter and a hateful good,
  Because its virtues are not understood;
  Yet many things, impossible to thought,
  Have been by need to full perfection brought:
  The daring of the soul proceeds from thence,
  Sharpness of wit, and active diligence:
  Prudence at once, and fortitude, it gives,
  And, if in patience taken, mends our lives;         
  For even that indigence, that brings me low,
  Makes me myself, and Him above, to know.

RHYME a a *

  A good which none would challenge, few would choose,
  A fair possession, which mankind refuse.
  If we from wealth to poverty descend,
  Want gives to know the flatterer from the friend.
  If I am old and ugly, well for you,
  No lewd adulterer will my love pursue;

RHYME a a *

  Nor jealousy, the bane of married life,
  Shall haunt you for a wither'd homely wife;         
  For age and ugliness, as all agree,
  Are the best guards of female chastity.
  Yet since I see your mind is worldly bent,
  I'll do my best to further your content.
  And therefore of two gifts in my dispose,
  Think ere you speak, I grant you leave to choose:
  Would you I should be still deform'd and old,
  Nauseous to touch, and loathsome to behold;

RHYME a a *

  On this condition to remain for life,
  A careful, tender, and obedient wife,               
  In all I can contribute to your ease,
  And not in deed, or word, or thought displease:
  Or would you rather have me young and fair,
  And take the chance that happens to your share?
  Temptations are in beauty, and in youth,
  And how can you depend upon my truth?
  Now weigh the danger with the doubtful bliss,
  And thank yourself, if aught should fall amiss.

RHYME a a *

    Sore sigh'd the knight, who this long sermon heard;
  At length, considering all, his heart he cheer'd,   
  And thus replied: My lady, and my wife,
  To your wise conduct I resign my life:
  Choose you for me, for well you understand
  The future good and ill, on either hand:
  But if an humble husband may request,
  Provide, and order all things for the best;
  Yours be the care to profit, and to please;
  And let your subject servant take his ease.

RHYME a a *

    Then thus in peace, quoth she, concludes the strife,
  Since I am turn'd the husband, you the wife:        
  The matrimonial victory is mine,
  Which, having fairly gain'd, I will resign:
  Forgive if I have said or done amiss,
  And seal the bargain with a friendly kiss.
  I promised you but one content to share,
  But now I will become both good and fair:
  No nuptial quarrel shall disturb your ease;
  The business of my life shall be to please:
  And for my beauty, that, as time shall try--
  But draw the curtain first, and cast your eye.      

RHYME a a *

    He look'd, and saw a creature heavenly fair,
  In bloom of youth, and of a charming air.
  With joy he turn'd, and seized her ivory arm;
  And like Pygmalion found the statue warm.
  Small arguments there needed to prevail;
  A storm of kisses pour'd as thick as hail.
  Thus long in mutual bliss they lay embraced,
  And their first love continued to the last:
  One sunshine was their life, no cloud between;
  Nor ever was a kinder couple seen.                  

RHYME a a *

    And so may all our lives like theirs be led;
  Heaven send the maids young husbands fresh in bed!
  May widows wed as often as they can,
  And ever for the better change their man!
  And some devouring plague pursue their lives,
  Who will not well be govern'd by their wives!

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  A parish priest was of the pilgrim train;
  An awful, reverend, and religious man.
  His eyes diffused a venerable grace,
  And charity itself was in his face.

RHYME a a a

  Rich was his soul, though his attire was poor;
  (As God had clothed his own ambassador;)
  For such, on earth, his bless'd Redeemer bore.

RHYME a a *

  Of sixty years he seem'd; and well might last
  To sixty more, but that he lived too fast;

RHYME a a *

  Refined himself to soul, to curb the sense;               
  And made almost a sin of abstinence,
  Yet, had his aspect nothing of severe,
  But such a face as promised him sincere.

RHYME a a a

  Nothing reserved or sullen was to see;
  But sweet regards, and pleasing sanctity:
  Mild was his accent, and his action free.

RHYME a a *

  With eloquence innate his tongue was arm'd;
  Though harsh the precept, yet the preacher charm'd.
  For letting down the golden chain from high,
  He drew his audience upward to the sky;                   

RHYME a a *

  And oft, with holy hymns, he charm'd their ears:
  (A music more melodious than the spheres.)
  For David left him, when he went to rest,
  His lyre; and after him he sung the best.
  He bore his great commission in his look:
  But sweetly temper'd awe; and soften'd all he spoke.

RHYME a a a

  He preach'd the joys of heaven, and pains of hell;
  And warn'd the sinner with becoming zeal;
  But on eternal mercy loved to dwell.

RHYME a a *

  He taught the gospel rather than the law,                 
  And forced himself to drive: but loved to draw.

RHYME a a *

  For fear but freezes minds; but love, like heat,
  Exhales the soul sublime, to seek her native seat.
  To threats the stubborn sinner oft is hard,
  Wrapp'd in his crimes, against the storm prepared;
  But, when the milder beams of mercy play,
  He melts, and throws his cumbrous cloak away,
  Lightning and thunder (heaven's artillery)
  As harbingers before the Almighty fly:
  Those but proclaim his style, and disappear;              
  The stiller sound succeeds, and God is there.

RHYME a a *

    The tithes, his parish freely paid, he took;
  But never sued, or cursed with bell and book.
  With patience bearing wrong; but offering none:
  Since every man is free to lose his own.
  The country churls, according to their kind,
  (Who grudge their dues, and love to be behind),
  The less he sought his offerings, pinch'd the more,
  And praised a priest contented to be poor.

RHYME a a *

    Yet of his little he had some to spare,                 
  To feed the famish'd, and to clothe the bare;
  For mortified he was to that degree,
  A poorer than himself he would not see.
  True priests, he said, and preachers of the Word,
  Were only stewards of their sovereign Lord:
  Nothing was theirs; but all the public store;
  Intrusted riches, to relieve the poor:
  Who, should they steal for want of his relief,
  He judged himself accomplice with the thief.

RHYME a a *

    Wide was his parish; not contracted close               
  In streets, but here and there a straggling house;
  Yet still he was at hand, without request,
  To serve the sick; to succour the distress'd:
  Tempting, on foot, alone, without affright,
  The dangers of a dark tempestuous night.

RHYME a a *

    All this the good old man perform'd alone,
  Nor spared his pains; for curate he had none:
  Nor durst he trust another with his care;
  Nor rode himself to Paul's, the public fair,
  To chaffer for preferment with his gold,                  
  Where bishoprics and sinecures are sold:

RHYME a a a

  But duly watch'd his flock, by night and day,
  And from the prowling wolf redeem'd the prey;
  And hungry sent the wily fox away.

RHYME a a *

    The proud he tamed, the penitent he cheer'd;
  Nor to rebuke the rich offender fear'd.
  His preaching much, but more his practice wrought;
  (A living sermon of the truths he taught);
  For this by rules severe his life he squared,
  That all might see the doctrine which they heard.         
  For priests, he said, are patterns for the rest:
  (The gold of heaven, who bear the God impress'd):
  But when the precious coin is kept unclean,
  The Sovereign's image is no longer seen.
  If they be foul on whom the people trust,
  Well may the baser brass contract a rust.

RHYME a a *

    The prelate for his holy life he prized;
  The worldly pomp of prelacy despised:
  His Saviour came not with a gaudy show;
  Nor was his kingdom of the world below.                   

RHYME a a a

  Patience in want, and poverty of mind,
  These marks of Church and Churchmen he design'd,
  And living taught, and dying left behind.

RHYME a a *

  The crown he wore was of the pointed thorn:
  In purple he was crucified, not born.
  They who contend for place and high degree,
  Are not his sons, but those of Zebedee.

RHYME a a *

    Not but he knew the signs of earthly power
  Might well become Saint Peter's successor;
  The holy father holds a double reign,               
  The prince may keep his pomp, the fisher must be plain.

RHYME a a *

    Such was the saint, who shone with every grace,
  Reflecting, Moses'-like, his Maker's face.
  God saw his image lively was express'd;
  And his own work, as in creation, bless'd.

RHYME a a *

    The Tempter saw him too, with envious eye;
  And, as on Job, demanded leave to try.
  He took the time when Richard was deposed,
  And high and low with happy Harry closed.
  This prince, though great in arms, the priest withstood:
  Near though he was, yet not the next of blood.

RHYME a a a

  Had Richard, unconstrain'd, resign'd the throne,
  A king can give no more than is his own:
  The title stood entail'd, had Richard had a son.

RHYME a a *

    Conquest, an odious name, was laid aside,
  Where all submitted, none the battle tried.
  The senseless plea of right by Providence
  Was, by a flattering priest, invented since;
  And lasts no longer than the present sway;
  But justifies the next who comes in play.           

RHYME a a *

    The people's right remains; let those who dare
  Dispute their power, when they the judges are.

RHYME a a *

    He join'd not in their choice, because he knew
  Worse might, and often did, from change ensue.
  Much to himself he thought; but little spoke;
  And, undeprived, his benefice forsook.

RHYME a a *

    Now, through the land, his cure of souls he stretch'd;
  And like a primitive apostle preach'd:
  Still cheerful; ever constant to his call;
  By many follow'd; loved by most, admired by all.    
  With what he begg'd, his brethren he relieved:
  And gave the charities himself received.
  Gave, while he taught; and edified the more,
  Because he showed, by proof, 'twas easy to be poor.

RHYME a a *

    He went not with the crowd to see a shrine;
  But fed us, by the way, with food divine.

RHYME a a *

    In deference to his virtues, I forbear
  To show you what the rest in orders were:
  This brilliant is so spotless and so bright,
  He needs no foil, but shines by his own proper light.   

